=== Page 0 ===
NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
OPTIMAL MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICIES IN DISAGGREGATED ECONOMIES
Lydia Cox
Jiacheng Feng
Gernot Müller
Ernesto Pastén
Raphael Schoenle
Michael Weber
Working Paper 32914
http://www.nber.org/papers/w32914
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2024
Schoenle and Weber gratefully acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation under
grant number 1756997. We thank participants in conferences and seminars in several institutions for
comments and discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Central Bank of Chile. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2024 by Lydia Cox, Jiacheng Feng, Gernot Müller, Ernesto Pastén, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael
Weber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

=== Page 1 ===
Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policies in Disaggregated Economies
Lydia Cox, Jiacheng Feng, Gernot Müller, Ernesto Pastén, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael
Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 32914
September 2024
JEL No. E32, E62
ABSTRACT
The jointly optimal monetary and fiscal policy mix in a multi-sector New Keynesian model with 
sectoral government spending and productivity shocks entails a separation of roles: Sectoral 
government spending optimally adjusts to sectoral output gaps and inflation rates---a policy 
supported by evidence from sectoral federal procurement data. Monetary policy optimally focuses 
on aggregate stabilization, but deviates from a zero-inflation target; in a model calibration to the 
U.S., however, it effectively approximates a zero-inflation target.  Because monetary policy is a 
blunt instrument and government spending trades off stabilization against the optimal-level public 
good provision, the first best is not achieved.
Lydia Cox
Department of Economics 
University of Wisconsin-Madison 
1180 Observatory Drive 
Madison, WI 53715
and NBER
lydia.cox@wisc.edu
Jiacheng Feng
Jane Street Capital
jackfeng6@hotmail.com
Gernot Müller
University of Tuebingen and CEPR 
Mohlstr. 36,
72074 Tuebingen,
Germany
gernot.mueller@uni-tuebingen.de
Ernesto Pastén
Central Bank of Chile
Agustinas 1180
Santiago
Chile
and Toulouse School of Economics
epasten@bcentral.cl
Raphael Schoenle
Brandeis University
Department of Economics
415 South Street
Waltham, MA 02454
and CEPR
schoenle@brandeis.edu
Michael Weber
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
michael.weber@chicagobooth.edu

=== Page 2 ===
1
Introduction
Business cycle ﬂuctuations are not perfectly synchronized across sectors. Sectors
may be hit differently by shocks, as the COVID-19 pandemic so forcefully illus-
trated (Guerrieri et al., 2022; Baqaee and Farhi, 2022), or they have distinct charac-
teristics that determine their responsiveness even to identical shocks.1 These fea-
tures raise challenges for stabilization policy. If productivity shocks are perfectly
correlated across and propagate in the same way in all sectors, a zero-inﬂation
policy attains the ﬁrst best by closing the output gap; the so-called “divine coin-
cidence.” But when these conditions are not met, monetary policy is too blunt of
a tool. Then, central banks must target a second-best inﬂation index that gives
higher weight to sectors in which shocks manifest in larger output deviations from
efﬁcient levels. This policy closes the aggregate output gap but tolerates subopti-
mal inﬂation volatility and levels of sectoral output.
Goodfriend and King (1997) articulate this challenge, Aoki (2001) formally shows
it, Benigno (2004) apply these insights in a monetary union, Eusepi et al. (2011)
explore this issue quantitatively, and La’O and Tahbaz-Salehi (2022) and Rubbo
(2023) extend it to production networks.
We revisit this policy prescription in
light of the fact that monetary policy interacts with sectoral government demand
in shaping economic ﬂuctuations. Our analysis builds on and leverages insights
from earlier work in Cox et al. (2024). They use the universe of federal procure-
ment contracts in the U.S. to show that government demand is not a monolithic
aggregate—big G—but is the sum of rich, disaggregated policy decisions, giving
rise to challenges but also opportunities for stabilization policy.
Against this background we shift the focus of ﬁscal stabilization from the ag-
gregate to the sectoral level and ask: What is the optimal policy mix if monetary
policy and sectoral ﬁscal policy are jointly determined? Moreover, we derive pre-
dictions for sectoral government spending under optimal policy and ﬁnd sugges-
tive evidence that they are borne out in U.S. data. Thus, the stabilization role of
disaggregated ﬁscal policy is not just a theoretical possibility and we can contrast
it empirically with an optimal benchmark. We then trace out the implications for
monetary policy, in particular, the optimality of a zero-inﬂation policy to deal with
1See, among others, Pastén et al. (2020, 2024) and Bouakez et al. (2023).
1

=== Page 3 ===
disaggregated productivity shocks, and the desirability of the acyclical aggregate
ﬁscal policy observed in U.S. data.
We derive our insights in a New Keynesian multi-sector setup in which, build-
ing on the multi-country model of Galí and Monacelli (2008), the government de-
mands goods that contribute to welfare. The optimal, time-consistent mix of mone-
tary and ﬁscal policy prescribes a separation of roles: monetary policy takes care of
aggregate stabilization, whereas ﬁscal policy focuses on the sectoral level. We ob-
tain an intuitive rule for optimal sectoral ﬁscal policy: government demand should
be expansionary relative to the ﬁrst-best in sectors with negative inﬂation and out-
put gaps, that is, those sectors which experience positive productivity shocks.
The separation of roles hinges on the key trade-off in the design of joint mone-
tary and sectoral ﬁscal policies: Monetary policy is superior as a stabilization tool
to deal with productivity shocks, but government demand can be ﬁne tuned at
any required disaggregated level, contrary to monetary policy. The intuition holds
in a single-sector model: A positive productivity shock decreases prices and the
output gap. If monetary policy engineers a demand stimulus, the output gap can
be closed exactly when prices do not respond—a “divine coincidence”. The same
conclusion does not hold if government demand engineers the stimulus, because
it additionally crowds out consumption and thus affects labor supply. In addition,
monetary policy per se does not enter in welfare, whereas government demand
does by providing goods valued by households. Hence, even if a “divine coinci-
dence” were to exist for ﬁscal policy, it might be suboptimal to fully exploit it.2
In our model, optimal monetary policy deviates from a zero-inﬂation target.
Both monetary and sectoral ﬁscal policy give higher weight to sectors with stickier
prices, that is, those in which a given shock yields larger output gaps. However,
numerical exercises suggest that the deviation of optimal monetary policy from a
zero-inﬂation target is quantitatively small relative to a case when monetary policy
is the only stabilization tool. Yet, the ﬁrst best is never attained.
Complementary to these theoretical results, the following question naturally
arises: Is the disaggregated stabilization role of ﬁscal policy just a theoretical pos-
sibility or can we ﬁnd empirical support for it in U.S. data? First, as Cox et al. (2024)
2“Divine coincidence” may exist for ﬁscal policy but requires assuming a suboptimal ﬁscal
rule in a frictionless economy. We discuss this possibility in Appendix D.
2

=== Page 4 ===
argue, government purchases of goods and services are the most volatile compo-
nent of total government spending and exhibit substantial sectoral reallocation.
These facts suggest that government spending is ﬂexible enough to perform such
a stabilizing role. Second, the joint correlation of sectoral government demand, sec-
toral inﬂation and sectoral output in the data is indeed broadly consistent with the
theoretical optimal sectoral ﬁscal rule, but not with a purely aggregate ﬁscal sta-
bilization policy. We establish this result based on regression analyses, construct-
ing measures of government demand at the 4-digit NAICS sector level from US-
Aspending.gov, which covers the universe of federal procurement contracts from
2001 onwards, using Compustat sales data, producer price inﬂation from the BLS,
and a sectoral measure of the average frequency of price changes constructed by
Pastén et al. (2020, 2024). In particular, consistent with the theoretical optimal ﬁscal
rule, we ﬁnd that ﬁscal policy is more active in sectors in which prices are stickier.
We want to stress that we do not argue ﬁscal policy decisions follow the rules
we derive in the model. In reality, the allocation of government demand follows a
complicated political process involving Congress, lobbying and stakeholders inter-
acting in many layers, things we all abstract from in the model. A distinct literature
studies several aspects of such a process, see, for instance, Bisin et al. (2015) and
Halac and Yared (2022). Yet, we consider it useful to contrast the outcome of such
a process with an optimal ﬁscal policy that balances its direct welfare effects with
stabilization purposes. Remarkably, the model rules and its empirical counterparts
are similar. Given this alignment, we study the implications of optimal ﬁscal policy
on monetary policy and the cyclicality of aggregate government demand.
We also study the implications of our setting through the lens of the aggregate
Phillips curve. As stressed by Rubbo (2023), Guerrieri et al. (2021) and Afrouzi and
Bhattarai (2023), aggregation of sectoral Phillips curves yields an extra term akin to
an “aggregate cost-push shock" in setups with sectoral input-output interconnec-
tions and no ﬁscal policy. Such a result holds in any economy in which aggregation
is not trivial, including ours. In numerical exercises, we ﬁnd the volatility of the
“aggregate cost-push shock" is six times larger if monetary policy follows a zero-
inﬂation target instead of its optimal rule. Thus, even if a zero-inﬂation policy does
almost as well as optimal monetary policy when the government follows optimal
sectoral ﬁscal policy, it faces the practical challenge of dealing with highly volatile
3

=== Page 5 ===
“aggregate cost-push shocks.”
Finally, we highlight the implications of optimal ﬁscal policy for the cyclical-
ity of aggregate government demand. A well-established fact for advanced economies,
including the U.S., is that ﬁscal spending is largely acyclical (for instance, Talvi and
Vegh, 2005). This feature has been regarded as suggestive that ﬁscal policy does
not play a stabilization role (Chari et al., 2007). We ﬁnd a muted cyclicality is not
inconsistent with government demand playing a stabilization role; it just does it
at a disaggregated level. In our setup, if sectors were symmetric and the economy
were efﬁcient, optimal ﬁscal policy is perfectly cyclical. However, a milder cycli-
cality arises when the economy is inefﬁcient and the composition of private and
public demand differs across sectors, as in the U.S., with public demand tilted to-
wards stickier sectors (Cox et al., 2024). Cyclicality is even lower if monetary policy
follows standard inﬂation targeting as ﬁscal policy is even more active in this case.
The paper is structured as follows. The remainder of this introduction discusses
the related literature and our contribution. Section 2 lays out the model. Section 3
discusses the trade-offs which govern optimal policy, its objective function, and the
optimal ﬁscal and monetary policy rules we obtain. Section 4 presents the data and
empirical results supporting the idea that sectoral government demand does play
a disaggregated stabilization role. Section 5 studies its implications for monetary
policy and aggregate government demand. Section 6 concludes.
Related Literature.
In addition to work cited above, our analysis relates to four
strands of the literature. First, a line of work conducts a positive analysis on the
importance of sectors in ﬁscal policy transmission, notably the inﬂuential study
of Ramey and Shapiro (1998) and more recent work by Proebsting (2022), Flynn
et al. (2022) and Bouakez et al. (2022). Bouakez et al. (2023) develop richer multi-
sector models with input-output structures to shed light on the ﬁscal transmission
mechanism. In contrast to these papers, we offer a normative perspective.
Second, to do so, our analysis builds on work about the optimal adjustment of
government spending in aggregate economies if monetary policy is constrained by
the zero lower bound, or an exchange-rate target. Bianchi et al. (2023) study the
optimal adjustment of government spending in the presence of nominal rigidities
and sovereign risk in a open economy with an exchange rate peg. Such a setting
4

=== Page 6 ===
calls for a modiﬁed Samuelson rule which, absent frictions, requires optimal pol-
icy to equate the marginal beneﬁts of higher government spending to the marginal
costs of reduced private consumption. Hettig and Müller (2018) study the optimal
response of country-level government spending in a model of a monetary union
in which monetary policy is constrained by the effective lower bound. Bilbiie et
al. (2024) revisit the trade-offs for monetary and ﬁscal policy in a model that em-
phasizes household heterogeneity and inequality. Our analysis, instead, considers
a multi-sector closed-economy model and is focused on heterogeneities along the
production side of the economy.
Third, several papers show how taxes should adjust when monetary policy is
constrained by the zero lower bound (Eggertsson et al., 2004; Correia et al., 2013);
as well as the possibility of “non-conventional” ﬁscal policy to replicate a ﬁrst-best
when monetary policy is constrained by the zero lower bound as well as empir-
ical evidence (Correia et al., 2013; D’Acunto et al., 2018, 2022; Bachmann et al.,
2021). Farhi et al. (2014), in turn, consider a monetary union and study the opti-
mal tax policy which brings about a “ﬁscal devaluation” in response to country-
speciﬁc shocks; and Antonova and Müller (2024) study the optimal tax response
to sectoral shocks in the New Keynesian model with network structure. Woodford
(2022) studies transfers as a way to stabilize effective demand in a multi-sector
model. We focus instead on government spending ﬁnanced through lump-sum
taxes to isolate its optimal stabilization role.
Our analysis relates to earlier and recent work on ﬁscal rules. Galí and Per-
otti (2003), in particular, study how various ﬁscal instruments adjust to the cy-
cle based on a sample of European countries. Kliem and Kriwoluzky (2014) offer
a normative model-based assessment of alternative ﬁscal rules, Halac and Yared
(2018) study international coordination of ﬁscal rules, and Hatchondo et al. (2022)
focus on the performance of ﬁscal rules in a model of sovereign risk. In contrast,
assuming optimal policy, we establish a link between sectoral government spend-
ing, sectoral output gaps and sectoral inﬂation and show that granular data for
federal purchases is largely consistent with this relationship. Finally, we focus on
discretionary optimal monetary and ﬁscal policy. A large literature exists studying
policy without commitment in more complex environments, with Afrouzi et al.
(2023) being a recent example. We leave such extensions for future research.
5

=== Page 7 ===
2
A New Keynesian multi-sector model
We model the optimal allocation of government sectoral demand building on the
multi-country setup of Galí and Monacelli (2008). In our model, though, the sec-
toral composition of private and public demand is ﬂexible in line with the evidence
in Cox et al. (2024) and we consider time-consistent policies. Our model has K
sectors with a continuum of monopolistic competitive ﬁrms operating in each of
them. Prices are adjusted infrequently. A representative household provides labor
in competitive sectoral markets. Government purchases are ﬁnanced via lump-
sum taxes with its budget balanced at all times. Finally, monetary policy adjusts
the short-term nominal interest rate.
2.1
Setup
We now introduce the problem of the representative household, the allocation of
the government demand within and across sectors, and the ﬁrms’ problem.
Households.
The economy is populated by an inﬁnitely-lived representative house-
hold with expected utility given by
E0
∞
∑
t=0
βt
"
(1 −χ)log(Ct) + χlog(Gt) −
K
∑
k=1
νk
N1+ϕ
kt
1 + ϕ
#
,
(2.1)
where β ∈(0,1) is the time-discount factor, E0 is the expectation operator, Ct and
Gt are indexes of private and public consumption, and Nkt denotes hours worked
in sector k = 1,...,K. The parameter χ determines the weight of each type of con-
sumption on per-period utility. Private and public consumption are Cobb-Douglas
aggregates:
Ct ≡
K
∏
k

ω−1
ck Ckt
ωck and Gt ≡
K
∏
k

ω−1
gk Gkt
ωgk ,
(2.2)
where ϕ > 0,νk > 0 and the subscript k refers to the sector in which bundles Ckt
and Gkt are assembled. Parameters ωck and ωgk measure the weight of sector k in
the private and public consumption index, respectively. For the sectoral bundles,
6

=== Page 8 ===
we assume a CES structure:
Ckt ≡

µ−1/θ
k
Z
j∈Jk
Ckt(j)1−1
θ dj

θ
θ−1
and Gkt ≡

µ−1/θ
k
Z
j∈Jk
Gkt(j)1−1
θ dj

θ
θ−1
.
(2.3)
Inﬁnite varieties of private and public goods exist, each indexed by j with to-
tal mass equal to 1; ﬁrm j produces variety j. A sector k is deﬁned as the set of
ﬁrms producing goods with index belonging to the set Jk with mass µk such that
∑K
k=1 µk = 1. The elasticity of substitution across varieties within sectors is θ > 1
for private and public goods, which is assumed to be the same across all sectors.
The household maximizes equation (2.1) subject to a period budget constraint
∑
k
PktCkt + ∑
k
PG
ktGkt + Qt−1Bt−1 = ∑
k
WktNkt + Bt + Πt,
(2.4)
where Pkt, PG
kt and Wkt are sector-k prices paid by households, prices paid by the
government, and nominal wages paid by ﬁrms, respectively. Equation (2.4) fea-
tures the government’s total expenditures rather than taxes as we assume a bal-
anced government budget throughout. In turn, Qt−1 is the period-t price of a one-
period discount bond, Bt, and Πt are dividends. In addition, we rule out Ponzi
schemes.
Pkt(j) denotes the price of variety j in sector k, and Pct is the consumer price
index. Household’s demand for the sectoral consumption and varieties within
sectors are given by:
Ckt = ωck
Pkt
Pct
−1
Ct and Ckt(j) = 1
µk
Pkt(j)
Pkt
−θ
Ckt,
(2.5)
where the respective price indices are:
Pct = ∏
k
(Pkt)ωck and Pkt =
Z
j∈Jk
Pkt(j)1−θ
1/(1−θ)
.
(2.6)
7

=== Page 9 ===
Sectoral labor supply, in turn, satisﬁes
νkCtNϕ
kt = (1 −χ)Wkt
Pct
(2.7)
and households’ consumption satisﬁes the Euler equation:
1 = βEt
"
It
Ct+1
Ct
−1 Pct
Pct+1
#
(2.8)
where It = 1/Et(Qt) is the gross nominal interest rate.
Firms.
A generic ﬁrm j in sector k specializes in the production of a unique vari-
ety, using labor Nkt(j) as the sole input:
Ykt(j) = AktNkt(j),
(2.9)
where Akt is exogenous, sector-speciﬁc productivity. The government subsidizes
labor at a constant rate τk, such that nominal marginal costs are given by:
MCn
kt(j) = (1 −τk)Wkt
Akt
.
(2.10)
Firms set prices every period à la Calvo and with associated probability of price
adjustment 1 −αk. In doing so a generic ﬁrms solves
max
P∗
kt
Et
"
∞
∑
τ=0
(αkβ)τ
CktPkt
Ck,t+τPk,t+τ

PktYd
k,t+τ|t(j) −Wk,t+τNk,t+τ|t(j)
#
.
Optimality requires
0 = Et
"
∞
∑
τ=0
(αkβ)τ
CktPkt
Ck,t+τPk,t+τ
Yd
k,t+τ|t

P∗
kt −
θ
θ −1 MCn
k,t+τ|t
#
,
(2.11)
where Yd
k,t+τ|t is the total demand at period t + τ relevant for the pricing problem of
a ﬁrm j that last reset prices in period t. We assume the government buys goods in
separated markets and are agnostic in that the government directly chooses its real
8

=== Page 10 ===
sectoral demand without taking a stand on the degree of nominal rigidity prices
that the government faces.3
Government.
The government jointly determines ﬁscal and monetary policy to
maximize social welfare. Its policy instruments are the nominal interest rate, It =
1/Et(Qt), and sectoral government spending, in real terms, [Gkt]K
k=1.
Equilibrium conditions.
Bonds are in zero net supply. Goods and labor markets
all clear:
Ykt(j) = Ckt(j) + Gkt(j)
(2.12)
Ykt = Ckt + Gkt
(2.13)
Nkt =
Z
j∈Jk
Nkt(j)dj
(2.14)
such that the aggregation of ﬁrms’ proﬁts is
Πt =
K
∑
k=1
h
PkCkt + PG
k Gkt −WktNkt
i
.
2.2
Efﬁcient allocation
To determine the efﬁcient allocation, we take a planner perspective and maximize
equation (2.1) subject to the aggregation technologies of private and public goods
in equations (2.2), the production technology in equation(2.9) and sectoral resource
constraints in equations (2.13). The optimality condition is
νk
Nϕ
kt
Akt
= (1 −χ)ωck
Ckt
= χωgk
Gkt
.
(2.15)
This condition is consistent with the Samuelson (1954) rule: efﬁciency requires the
marginal product of labor equals the marginal beneﬁts of government demand.
This condition implies that working hours are invariant to sectoral productiv-
ity shocks in the ﬁrst best, which is a convenient feature that facilitates the op-
timal policy analysis below. We obtain this result because of two assumptions:
3Cox et al. (2024) show that lump-sum taxes and Ricardian households imply that prices paid
by the government do not affect real variables up to a log-linear approximation.
9

=== Page 11 ===
the subsidy τk = θ−1 offsetting the effect of imperfect competition, and the optimal
steady-state provision of public goods. Using this latter assumption, we normalize
parameters νk to obtain that all ﬁrms are symmetric in steady state, so Nk(j) = 1,
and in the aggregate N = 1. Thus, the measure of ﬁrms in a sector, µk, is the only
source of cross-sectoral variation in steady-state output. The solution to the plan-
ner’s problem is then given by:
¯Nkt
=
µk
(2.16)
¯Ykt
=
µkAkt
(2.17)
¯Ckt
=
(1 −χ)ωck
(1 −χ)ωck + χωgk
¯Ykt ≡(1 −χk) ¯Ykt
(2.18)
¯Gkt
=
χωgk
(1 −χ)ωck + χωgk
¯Ykt ≡χk ¯Ykt.
(2.19)
where µk = (1 −χ)ωck + χωgk, νk ≡µ−ϕ
k
, χk ≡χωgk/µk and 1 −χk = (1 −χ)ωck/µk
and upper bars denote efﬁcient levels.
2.3
Approximate equilibrium dynamics
We now characterize the approximate log-linear equilibrium dynamics for an ar-
bitrary level of government demand in each sector. In a steady state with op-
timal public good provision, ωck = Ck/C with ∑K
k=1 ωck = 1, ωgk = Gk/G with
∑K
k=1 ωgk = 1, and µk = Yk/Y with ∑K
k=1 µk = 1.4 The ﬁrst-order approximation
of market-clearing conditions at sectoral and aggregate levels are
ykt = (1 −χk)ckt + χkgkt
and
yt = (1 −χ)ct + χgt.
(2.20)
The approximation of the Euler equation (2.8) is:
ct = Et(ct+1) −(it −Et(πt+1) −ρ),
where ρ = −logβ such that the log-linear approximation of sectoral demand in
4Minuscules denote log-linear deviations from steady state levels. Appendix A provides a full
solution of the steady state.
10

=== Page 12 ===
equation (2.5) and sectoral market clearing in equation (2.20) yield
ˆykt = Et ˆykt+1 −(1 −χk)(it −Et(πkt+1) −ρ) −χkEt∆ˆgkt+1.
(2.21)
Next, we express variables in terms of deviations from the efﬁcient allocation.
Deﬁne sectoral output gaps as ˜ykt ≡ykt −¯ykt and sectoral ﬁscal gaps as
˜fkt ≡(gkt −¯gkt) −(ykt −¯ykt) = gkt −ykt.
The last equality holds given that ¯ykt = ¯gkt = akt. Thus, (2.21) becomes
˜ykt = Et ˜ykt+1 −(it −Etπkt+1 −¯rkt) −χ∗
kEt∆˜fkt+1,
(2.22)
where χ∗
k ≡χk/(1 −χk) and ¯rkt is the sectoral natural rate of interest:
¯rkt ≡(1 −χk)−1 [Et∆¯ykt+1 −χkEt∆¯gkt+1] = Et∆akt+1.
We turn next to the optimal price setting in equation (2.11), which implies a
sectoral New Keynesian Phillips Curve. Using equations (2.5), (2.7), and (2.9), and
the deﬁnitions of sectoral output and ﬁscal gaps,
πkt = βEtπkt+1 + λk (1 + ϕ) ˜ykt −λkχ∗
k ˜fkt.
(2.23)
where πkt = ∆pkt and λk ≡(1 −αk)(1 −βαk)/αk. Sectoral Phillips curves do not
directly depend on sectoral price distortions, but instead are reﬂected in the cross-
sectoral dispersion of sectoral output gaps. To see this, we use the expressions
in equations (2.5) and (2.20) to obtain a relationship between sectoral output and
ﬁscal gaps:
˜ykt −˜yt = χ∗
k ˜fkt −χ∗˜ft −(pkt −pct) −(akt −at) + χ∗
K
∑
k
(µk −ωgk)akt
(2.24)
where χ∗≡χ/(1 −χ) and ˜ft is the aggregate ﬁscal gap; pkt and pct are household-
11

=== Page 13 ===
paid prices at sectoral and aggregate levels, respectively:
pkt = πkt + pkt−1,
(2.25)
pct =
K
∑
k
ωckpk,t,
(2.26)
πt =
K
∑
k
ωckπk,t,
(2.27)
˜ft =
K
∑
k
ωgk( ˜fkt + ˜ykt) −˜yt.
(2.28)
Aggregate dynamics are characterized by equations (2.22), (2.23), (2.24) and
(2.25) for all sectors k = 1,...,K and equations (2.26), (2.27), and (2.28). Note that
the aggregation of sectoral equations (2.24) and equation (2.28) yield
˜yt =
K
∑
k
µk ˜ykt.
(2.29)
To close this section, we want to make three remarks. First, sectoral productiv-
ity shocks and sectorally segmented labor markets imply that marginal costs are
perfectly correlated for ﬁrms within sectors but independent across sectors. In this
way, we rule out direct spillovers across sectors in order to focus on the degrees
of freedom due to sectoral ﬁscal policy in a disaggregated economy. Second, the
model allows for sector-speciﬁc nominal rigidity, which allows us to accommo-
date the empirical evidence for the U.S. documented by Pastén et al. (2020). In this
way, our analysis generalizes the setup of Aoki (2001), Benigno (2004), Eusepi et al.
(2011) and, although abstracting from input-output relationships, we connect with
La’O and Tahbaz-Salehi (2022), Guerrieri et al. (2021), Rubbo (2023), and Afrouzi
and Bhattarai (2023). Third, the model provides ﬂexibility to accommodate the
unequal sectoral composition of ﬁnal private demand (here, households) and gov-
ernment demand documented for the U.S. in Cox et al. (2024). In what follows, we
study how this sectoral bias affects the design of the optimal joint monetary and
sectoral ﬁscal policies.
12

=== Page 14 ===
3
The Optimal Policy Mix under Sticky Prices
We now present our main theoretical result: the joint, time-consistent optimal mon-
etary and sectoral ﬁscal policies, based on a second-order approximation of house-
hold’s welfare and log-linearly approximated dynamics.
3.1
Trade-offs
To set the stage, we start highlighting the trade-offs involved in the optimal policy
mix, ﬁrst for the one-sector special case and then for the multi-sector economy.
Single-sector economy.
Our model trivially collapses to a single-sector economy
if K = 1. This setup is equivalent to a multi-sector economy with aggregate pro-
ductivity shocks and perfectly symmetric sectors.
The Phillips curves in equation (2.23) imply that divine coincidence holds: mon-
etary policy can fully stabilize aggregate inﬂation, πt = 0, and closing the (aggre-
gate) output gap, ˜yt = 0, with no need of ﬁscal policy to deviate from the ﬁrst-best
provision of public goods, ˜ft = 0. Monetary policy dominates ﬁscal policy as stabi-
lization tool because the latter does not enjoy a divine coincidence: The ﬁscal rule
χ∗˜ft = (1 + ϕ) ˜yt that sets πt = 0 in equation (2.23) is inconsistent with ˜yt = 0 in
equation (2.22) if monetary policy remains passive, it = 0. Intuitively, government
demand can engineer the same nominal aggregate demand expansion as monetary
policy but, as it crowds out consumption, it affects labor supply, and thus it yields
a different response of inﬂation and the output gap.
Multi-sector economy.
We now consider a multi-sector economy, that is, K > 1.
If monetary policy were the only stabilization instrument with ˜fkt = 0 for all k, then
the aggregation of sectoral Phillips curves in equation (2.23) implies that divine co-
incidence breaks down. Instead, a modiﬁed version of divine coincidence applies,
extensively shown in different contexts in the literature (Rubbo, 2023; Afrouzi et
al., 2024, for example). In our setup, the aggregation of equation (2.23) implies that
monetary policy alone can close the aggregate output gap, ˜yt = 0, if it targets an
inﬂation index
πDC
t
≡
K
∑
k=1
λ−1
k µk
∑K
k=1 λ−1
k µk
πkt
(3.30)
13

=== Page 15 ===
which gives higher weight to sectors with sticker prices, i.e., those with larger ex-
pected output gaps. However, inﬂation πt relevant for households is not stabilized
under this monetary policy rule; sectoral inﬂation and sectoral output gaps are not
stabilized either. This is where sectoral ﬁscal policy can play a complementary
role: unlike aggregate monetary policy, sectoral ﬁscal policy can be tailored at the
required disaggregated, in this case, sectoral level.
As in the single sector economy, ﬁscal policy does not enjoy an “aggregate di-
vine coincidence”. As such, it is a complement and not substitute of monetary
policy. Fiscal policy does not enjoy a “disaggregated divine coincidence” either.5
To see this point, note that the ﬁscal rule that sets πkt = 0 in equation (2.23) is incon-
sistent with ˜ykt = 0 in equation (2.22) for all sectors k for any monetary policy rule.
The intuition is the same as in the single sector economy above: to deal with pro-
ductivity shocks, pure sectoral nominal demand management is required, which
is unfeasible for ﬁscal policy as it affects labor supply. Therefore, the ﬁrst best is
not attainable. Yet, disaggregated ﬁscal policy can improve outcomes by deviating
from ﬁrst-best government demand when jointly working with monetary policy.
This is what we turn to next.
3.2
Optimal Policy
Given these trade-offs, we now derive the optimal time-consistent mix of monetary
and sectoral ﬁscal policies. Appendix B solves for the second-order approximation
of the welfare function which is
Wt =
∞
∑
t=0
βtUt = −1
2
∞
∑
t=0
βt∑
k
µk
θ(1 −χk)
λk
π2
kt + (1 + ϕ) ˜y2
kt + χ∗
k ˜f 2
kt

(3.31)
where we abstract from terms independent of monetary and ﬁscal policy. This wel-
fare function has three main components. Sectoral inﬂation is a proxy for the inef-
ﬁciency introduced by intra-sector dispersion of prices due to the nominal rigidity.
Thus, this term is eliminated if a sector has fully ﬂexible prices, in which case
λk −→∞. This inefﬁciency affects the allocation of intra-sectoral household con-
sumption, which, in steady state is a share 1 −χ∗
k of total sectoral output. Note a
5Appendix D shows that divine coincidence, at aggregate and disaggregated levels, does hold
for sectoral ﬁscal policy if frictionless output is inefﬁcient due to suboptimal ﬁscal policy.
14

=== Page 16 ===
given level of intra-sectoral price dispersion yields a larger distortion as the intra-
sectoral elasticity of substitution of consumption θ is larger. The second term is
related to sectoral output gaps capturing the inter-sectoral dispersion of consump-
tion. Finally, sectoral ﬁscal gaps encapsulate the sectoral provision of public goods
and, together with sectoral output gaps, the equilibrium working hours that the
household provides in each sector.
We focus on time-consistent policies. To solve this problem, we follow the stan-
dard approach of directly choosing allocations {pkt,πkt, ˜ykt, ˜fkt, pct, ˜yt, ˜ft} by opti-
mizing equation (3.31) subject to sectoral Phillips curves in equation (2.23), sectoral
demand in equation (2.24) and the relation between sectoral prices and sectoral in-
ﬂation in equation (2.25) for all sectors, plus the aggregation equations (2.26), (2.28)
and (2.29). Aggregate inﬂation πt is deﬁned in equation (2.27) and the monetary
policy rule that solves for this allocation is implicitly deﬁned in the aggregation of
sectoral IS curves in equation (2.22).
A few observations follow from the expression for welfare in equation (3.31).
First, even though we allow the sectoral composition of consumption and aggre-
gate government demand to differ, the relative importance of sectors in welfare is
given only by steady-state sectoral size, µk = Yk/Y. Second, no aggregate variable
enters the welfare function. Thus, closing the aggregate output gap is not neces-
sarily a target for optimal policy. Third, inter-sectoral price dispersion does not
explicitly enter welfare and instead is captured by equation (2.24), which enters
in the optimal policy problem as a restriction. Appendix C presents the detailed
solution. The optimal sectoral ﬁscal rule prescribes that, in equilibrium,
˜f ∗
kt = −(1 + ϕ)(1 + λk)
1 + (1 + ϕ)λk
˜y∗
kt −
θ(1 −χk)ϕ
1 + (1 + ϕ)λk
π∗
kt.
(3.32)
The intuition is that, when a positive productivity shock hits in a sector, marginal
costs of ﬁrms in that sector decrease, and so do sectoral prices, to the extent that
nominal price rigidity allows it, the latter introducing inefﬁcient price dispersion.
In addition, output increases but not as much as in a ﬂex-price economy, so the sec-
toral output gap is negative. In this situation, as discussed in section 3.1, an expan-
sionary sectoral ﬁscal policy simultaneously reduces the response of the sectoral
15

=== Page 17 ===
inﬂation and the gap in the response of output relative to the ﬂex-price response –
although it can not set both to zero at the same time.
Equation (3.32) prescribes that sectoral ﬁscal policy is more aggressive in sec-
tors with stickier prices, which is inversely captured by λk ≡(1 −αk)(1 −βαk)/αk,
where the government represents a smaller share of sectoral steady-state demand
χk, the intra-sectoral elasticity of substitution θ is larger and when the inverse-
Frisch elasticity ϕ is larger. More stickiness implies that sectoral inﬂation yields
higher intra-sectoral price dispersion which affects only private demand. Thus,
when the share χk of government demand is larger, price dispersion has smaller
effect on welfare. In addition, larger θ implies that a given intra-sectoral price
dispersion generates larger distortion and larger ϕ implies a stronger response of
sectoral labor supply. Moreover, in stickier sectors, the output gap and inﬂation
have stronger and weaker responses to shocks, respectively.
Turning to optimal monetary policy, the following condition holds
θ
K
∑
k=1
(1 −χk)µk
1 + λk(1 + ϕ)πkt = −
K
∑
k=1
µk
1 + λk(1 + ϕ) ˜ykt.
(3.33)
This is a variation of the usual “leaning against the wind” policy. If all sec-
tors were symmetric in the steady state, such that λk = λ and ωck = ωgk = µk for
k = 1,...,K, optimal monetary policy splits the aggregate effect of sectoral shocks
between aggregate inﬂation and the aggregate output gap. However, in general,
sectoral inﬂation and sectoral output gaps are weighted according to steady-state
output shares adjusted by their degree of nominal price rigidity and the steady-
state share of private consumption on sectoral output, (1 −χk).
To see how monetary policy, aggregate in nature, and sectoral ﬁscal policy in-
teract, mixing equation (3.32) and equation (3.33) yields
K
∑
k=1
µk(gkt −¯gkt) = 0.
(3.34)
If sectors were symmetric in steady state, the aggregate provision of public
goods would not deviate from the ﬁrst best. The intuition is related to our discus-
sion above: monetary policy is superior to ﬁscal policy as an aggregate stabiliza-
16

=== Page 18 ===
tion tool, resulting in a separation of roles: ﬁscal policy stabilizes at a disaggregated
level and monetary policy stabilizes at the aggregate level.
Up to log-linear approximation, aggregate government demand weights sec-
tors by [ωgk]K
k=1, whereas equation (3.34) weights them by [µk]K
k=1. In words, in
the aggregate, ﬁscal policy gives higher weight to deviations from ﬁrst-best public
good provision in sectors in which households’ steady-state demand is higher than
the government’s, ωck > µk > ωgk. A corollary of this result is that equation (3.34)
does not imply that aggregate government demand gt is unresponsive to shocks.
We come back to this feature when we discuss the implications of optimal ﬁscal
policy on a muted cyclicality of aggregate government demand.
4
Empirical Evidence
This section provides evidence that a disaggregated stabilization role for govern-
ment demand is plausible empirically – suggesting that optimal policy and its im-
plications are more than just abstract theoretical possibilities. We ﬁrst motivate that
government demand is ﬂexible and rich enough to play such a role by referring to
Cox et al. (2024). Second, we present empirical evidence that the sectoral alloca-
tion of government demand is indeed broadly consistent with the optimal sectoral
ﬁscal policy in equation (3.32). The latter ﬁnding is remarkable if not surprising
because, in practice, the allocation of government demand follows an involved
decision-making process that may not align with our simple model.
4.1
Government demand is ﬂexible
Based on the insights in Cox et al. (2024), government appears ﬂexible and disag-
gregated enough to potentially play a stabilization role at the sectoral level.6 Cox et
al. (2024) use the universe of U.S. federal procurement contracts from USASpend-
ing.gov to establish two facts that provide validity in this regard:
1. Although federal procurement—the purchases of goods and services con-
ducted by the U.S. federal Government—corresponds to only 16 percent of
total government spending, it accounts for half of the variation of the growth
6More detail about the sources, features of and cleaning of these data can be found in Cox et
al. (2024).
17

=== Page 19 ===
rate of total government spending. Conceptually, procurement is the com-
ponent of government spending that directly speaks to the way that govern-
ment spending is typically introduced in macro models. In addition, pro-
curement is the most ﬂexible component at the aggregate level.
2. Most of the variation in federal procurement is idiosyncratic across sectors.
This fact suggests the presence of large sectoral reallocation of government
spending period by period. If instead this sectoral government demand were
in ﬁxed proportions, it would sufﬁce to model aggregate government de-
mand.
The other three facts Cox et al. (2024) document are: (i) the government con-
ducts its purchases in competitive auctions in segregated markets relative to pri-
vate agents. This fact is the reason why the government in our model directly
decides its real demand in a setup in which procurement prices play no role, as dis-
cussed above; (ii) duration of contracts that guide the persistence of ﬁscal shocks
at the ﬁrm and sectoral levels – we abstract from such shocks in the paper at hand;
(iii) distinct sectoral composition of government demand relative to private de-
mand. We incorporate this fact in numerical exercises presented in section 5.
4.2
Government demand indeed plays a stabilization role
The sectoral allocation of government demand is indeed broadly consistent with
the optimal sectoral ﬁscal policy in equation (3.32), which postulates a correlation
of sectoral government demand with sectoral inﬂation and sectoral output gaps.
Note that after rearranging equation (3.32), we can write the sectoral ﬁscal gap as:
˜gkt = −
ϕ
1 + (1 + ϕ)λk
˜ykt −
θ(1 −χ∗
k)
1 + (1 + ϕ)λk
πkt,
such that government demand is expansionary relative to the ﬁrst best when the
sectoral output gap and/or sectoral inﬂation are negative. In contrast, an expan-
sionary ﬁscal shock yields a positive correlation to both sectoral inﬂation and out-
put gap, because it increases labor costs, pushing up inﬂation in the sector, whereas
price stickiness generates an expansion in sectoral output relative to its frictionless
18

=== Page 20 ===
counterpart. Therefore, negative estimated parameters are indicative of a stabiliza-
tion role behind the allocation of sectoral government demand.
With this logic in mind, we estimate the reduced form counterpart of equation
(4.2), speciﬁcally:
˜gkt = ηk + γt + β1 ˜ykt + β2πkt + νkt.
Importantly, we are not attempting to identify a causal effect, but instead to put
a sign on the correlations represented by β1 and β2. This is because equation
(4.2) is an equilibrium condition. Thus, we estimate variations of equation (4.2)
by OLS and by an instrumental variables approach. We construct all variables at
the NAICS 4-digit industry level, at a quarterly frequency. Sectoral government
demand is computed from the federal procurement data from USASpending.gov
from 2001 to 2019.7 We calculate sectoral inﬂation using the conﬁdential microdata
data used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) to construct the Producer Price
Index (PPI), whereas for output we use sales reported by publicly listed U.S. ﬁrms
in each sector, obtained from Compustat. We deﬂate both the government con-
tracts and sales series using sectoral PPI. We also add sector and time ﬁxed effects,
respectively denoted as ηk and γt, and weight the regressions by average annual
sectoral government spending.
In the model, sectoral government demand and sectoral output in equation
(4.2) are expressed as log gaps from frictionless counterparts, which are unobserv-
able. We therefore estimate the baseline regressions with various proxy variables to
show the robustness of the estimates and report the results in Table 1. Regardless,
a very consistent message arises from the estimation results: Column (1) shows re-
sults when the sectoral government demand and output gaps are approximated by
log-deviations from HP-ﬁltered series with the conventional smoothing parameter
of 1600. Consistent with the model, the estimated coefﬁcients are both negative
and highly signiﬁcant, as prescribed in equation (4.2). In column (3), the spec-
iﬁcation exploits the result from the model that frictionless sectoral government
demand is a ﬁxed proportion of sectoral output, so the sectoral ﬁscal gap does not
depend on its frictionless counterpart up to a constant. Thus, we use the sectoral
7The start of the sample is determined by data availability, and we choose the end of the
sample to alleviate on concerns arising due to the COVID-19 period.
19

=== Page 21 ===
Table 1:
Sectoral Relationship between Government Demand, Output and
Inﬂation
OLS
IV
(lr)2-5(lr)6-7
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
gkt
gkt
fkt
fkt
gkt
fkt
ykt
-0.113***
-0.120***
-1.416***
-1.425***
-0.348***
-1.428***
(0.032)
(0.032)
(0.043)
(0.044)
(0.093)
(0.122)
πkt
-0.011***
-0.011***
-0.007*
-0.007*
0.002
-0.004
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.009)
TFP (Cyclical)
0.074*
0.087
(0.037)
(0.050)
Observations
8954
8953
8954
8953
8389
8389
R2
0.242
0.243
0.930
0.930
—
—
Note: All regressions contain time (year × quarter) and sector (NAICS 4) ﬁxed ef-
fects and are weighted by sectoral government spending. In columns (1), (2), and
(5), the dependent variable is log git. In columns (3), (4), and (6), the dependent
variable is log ˜fkt = loggit −logyit. The instruments for column (5) and (6) are
constructed by estimating regressions of the type Xkt = β0 + ∑k β1kDx × Zt + ϵkt
where Xkt ∈( ˜ykt,πkt), Zt denotes one of the exogenous shocks, and instrumen-
tation uses predicted ˆXkt. This procedure is based on the baseline speciﬁcation
in Nakamura and Steinsson (2014). The partial R2s for the excluded instruments
are between 14 and 15 percent for each endogenous variable.
Because our
speciﬁcation relies on such a large number of instruments (one per industry x
exogenous shock), the Stock and Yogo (2005) F-Statistic is roughly 3.5 for each
endogenous variable.
ﬁscal gap, fkt, as the dependent variable in results reported in column (3): once
again, parameters are negative and signiﬁcant.
In columns (2) and (4), we show that the results continue to hold when we
estimate the same speciﬁcation, but include sectoral TFP shocks as controls. The
inclusion of this variable exploits the property in our model that frictionless gov-
ernment demand and output are functions of productivity shocks. To calculate a
proxy for productivity in period t for industry k, we aggregate ﬁrm-level estimates
of TFP, which we calculate using Compustat data, to the sector level. Speciﬁcally,
we estimate ﬁrm-level TFP as the protoptyical Solow residual, εit, of the following
20

=== Page 22 ===
speciﬁcation:
log(yit) = ϱi + ϱt + αk
s log(kit−1) + αn
s log(nit) + εit,
where yit denotes the real sales of ﬁrm i in sector k in quarter t, kit−1 denotes its
real capital stock, and nit denotes its employment. We include ﬁrm and time ﬁxed
effects, ϱi and ϱt. We construct ﬁrms’ real capital stock from Compustat data on the
change in gross property plant and equipment (PPE) and net investment. Columns
(2) and (4) of Table 1 report results with the TFP control for speciﬁcations with gkt
and fkt as dependent variables, respectively. The estimated parameters are again
negative and signiﬁcant, though slightly less so for inﬂation.
Finally, as columns (5) and (6) show, results of an instrumental variables ap-
proach align with the results from the other speciﬁcations. Here, our goal is to
use instruments for both ˜ykt and πkt that are not correlated with sectoral produc-
tivity shocks. We have two endogenous variables so the analysis requires at least
two instruments. We borrow three shocks from the literature that have been iden-
tiﬁed as exogenous shifters of output and inﬂation: a monetary policy shock—
speciﬁcally, the 30-minute change in expectations of the Federal Funds rate around
FOMC meetings from Acosta (2023); a credit shock—speciﬁcally, the excess bond
premium measure from Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012); and oil supply shocks from
Känzig (2021).8 To use these aggregate shocks to instrument for sectoral variables,
we follow Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) such that the independent variable is
the aggregate shock interacted with an industry dummy. Hence, in a ﬁrst stage
we regress industry output on the aggregate shock and ﬁxed effects, allowing in-
dustry outcomes to vary differently with the three shocks. We then use the ﬁtted
values as an instrument in the second stage. With this approach, we can no longer
estimate the coefﬁcient on inﬂation precisely, but the negative coefﬁcient on output
is robust also in this IV setting, again consistent with a sectoral stabilization role
for ﬁscal policy.
A different possible concern may arise from the fact that the sectoral ﬁscal rule
in equation (3.32) is conceptually similar to a Taylor rule. Thus, a standard issue
in the estimation of Taylor rules may also apply in our context: shocks to the rule
8We can exactly identify or overidentify the speciﬁcation and obtain similar results.
21

=== Page 23 ===
could affect parameter estimates. We belief this concern is small in our setting
for two reasons. First, Carvalho et al. (2021) shows the bias obtained from OLS
estimation of Taylor rules is rather small. Second, as the response of both sec-
toral inﬂation and output gap are positive to an expansionary sectoral ﬁscal shock,
the potential bias is likely upwards. As our estimated parameters are negative,
this potential bias therefore does not affect our conclusion that our results provide
suggestive evidence that government demand does play a stabilization role at the
disaggregate level broadly consistent with the optimal sectoral ﬁscal policy rule.
Relation with price stickiness.
Pastén et al. (2020, 2024) show that sectors in U.S.
data differ in their frequency of price changes. The optimal sectoral ﬁscal rule in
(3.32) prescribes a stronger reaction to sectoral output gaps and sectoral inﬂation
in “stickier” sectors. We explicitly take this source of heterogeneity into account
by dividing sectors into sticky and ﬂexible sectors using data on the frequency of
price adjustment calculated from the conﬁdential micro-data underlying the BLS
producer price index. We deﬁne a sector to be a “sticky” sector if it is characterized
by a below-median frequency of price adjustment. Doing so conﬁrms the role of
optimal ﬁscal policy in line with the mechanisms at work in the model: Table 2
shows that the estimated coefﬁcients are negative, signiﬁcant, and larger in mag-
nitude for “sticky” sectors relative to more ﬂexible sectors. This result holds for
both our OLS and instrumental-variable speciﬁcations, and across alternative de-
pendent variables, either sectoral government demand, gkt or sectoral ﬁscal gaps,
fkt. In particular, it holds in the sticky price sectors – aligning with the New Keyne-
sian intuition of effectiveness of government spending in sectors in which pricing
frictions are present.
5
Implications
This section highlights the implications of the optimal mix of monetary and sec-
toral ﬁscal policies for inﬂation targeting and aggregate ﬁscal policy. To do so, we
rely on a calibrated version of our model for the U.S.
Two main results arise: First, divine coincidence approximately holds as zero-
inﬂation targeting yields small welfare losses relative to the optimal monetary pol-
icy when sectoral ﬁscal policy is optimally conducted in both cases. At the same
22

=== Page 24 ===
Table 2: Sectoral Relationship and Price Stickiness
OLS
IV
(lr)2-3(lr)4-5
gkt
fkt
gkt
fkt
Flex × ykt
0.232***
-0.887***
-0.232
-1.321***
(0.058)
(0.078)
(0.135)
(0.179)
Sticky × ykt
-0.255***
-1.606***
-0.585***
-1.683***
(0.038)
(0.051)
(0.139)
(0.184)
Flex × πkt
-0.011***
-0.020***
0.008
0.005
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.010)
Sticky × πkt
-0.017***
0.018**
-0.121***
-0.157***
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.026)
(0.034)
Observations
8954
8954
8389
8389
R2
0.247
0.931
-0.066
0.038
Notes: All regressions contain time (year × quarter) and sector (NAICS 4) ﬁxed
effects and are weighted by average sectoral government contracts. In columns
(1) and (3), the dependent variable is the cyclical component of log git. In columns
(2) and (4) is loggit −logyit. A “sticky” sector is deﬁned as a sector in which
the frequency of producer price adjustment is below the median of all 4-digit
sectors.
The instruments are constructed by estimating regression of the type
Xkt = β0 + ∑k β1kDx × Zt + ϵkt where Xkt ∈( fkt,πkt), Zt denotes one of the
exogenous shocks, and instrumentation uses predicted ˆXkt.
time, our exercise shows that targeting a standard inﬂation index results in cen-
tral banks having to deal with seemingly large and volatile cost-push shocks as
interpreted through the lens of an aggregate Phillips curve. Second, our optimal
monetary and ﬁscal policy mix naturally prescribes a mild cyclicality of aggregate
government demand, a feature observed in U.S. data and often interpreted as ﬁscal
policy not playing a stabilization role. We show that it does, just not at the aggre-
gate but rather at the disaggregated level.
23

=== Page 25 ===
5.1
Calibration
The model is monthly, so β = 0.997. The inverse-Frisch elasticity is set at ϕ = 4, as
in Chetty et al. (2011). Steady-state government total demand as share of GDP is
χ = 18.5% as in Cox et al. (2024). The persistence of productivity shocks is ρ = 0.85.
For steady-state sectoral shares of private consumption, we calculate the sectoral
value-added shares using the “Use Table” from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) Input-Output accounts. Speciﬁcally, we calculate the average share for 121
NAICS 4-digit sectors between 2007 and 2012—the years in which the input-output
table is available at its most disaggregated level. Sectoral shares of government de-
mand are calculated as the share of government procurement contracts allocated to
each NAICS 4-digit sector, also an annual average across 2007 and 2012 to match
private consumption shares. The government procurement data come from US-
ASpending.gov. Lastly, to calculate the sectoral degree of nominal price rigidity,
we utilize the frequency of producer price changes derived from the micro data
that underlie the construction of the Producer Price Index (PPI) by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS), as in Pastén et al. (2020, 2024).
5.2
Divine coincidence
A well-established result is that time-consistent optimal monetary policy to deal
with productivity shocks in disaggregated economies deviates from targeting zero
inﬂation. If sectors are all identical and productivity shocks are aggregate, such
that the modelling a multi-sector economy is immaterial, monetary policy can
achieve the ﬁrst best by targeting on zero inﬂation as it also closes the aggregate
output gap – the so-called “divine coincidence". However, this result does not hold
when either sectors respond differently to aggregate shocks, for instance because
of heterogeneous degrees of nominal price rigidity, and/or if productivity shocks
are idiosyncratic. Optimal monetary policy does not attain the ﬁrst best, and to
close the aggregate output gap it needs to target a modiﬁed aggregate inﬂation
index that gives more weight to sectors with stickier prices.
When revisiting these results in a disaggregated economy in which monetary
policy is coupled to sectoral ﬁscal policy, our analysis recovers divine coincidence
in the sense that inﬂation targeting is quantitatively approximately optimal for our
24

=== Page 26 ===
model calibration to the U.S. economy. To establish this result, our analysis runs
simulations for four alternative policy schemes under four alternative parametriza-
tions, shown in Table 3 by combinations of columns (policy schemes) and rows
(parametrizations). The baseline exercise is shown in column (1) and the ﬁrst row
in each block of Table 3. Here, we assume jointly optimal monetary and sectoral
ﬁscal policy, as prescribed in equations (3.32) and (3.33), under a parameterization
that sets the sectoral frequency of price changes and the sectoral composition of
private and government demand consistent with U.S. data.
Column (2) assumes optimal monetary policy consistent with equation (3.33),
whereas sectoral ﬁscal policy is “passive”, that is, ˜fkt = 0 for any k. Column (3) as-
sumes monetary policy targets zero-inﬂation, whereas sectoral ﬁscal policy is con-
sistent with equation (3.32). Finally, column (4) assumes monetary policy targets
zero inﬂation, whereas ˜fkt = 0 for any k. Each policy scheme is evaluated under the
baseline parameterization—shown in the ﬁrst row of each block in Table 3—and
three alternative parameterizations. In the second row of each block, we assume
an equal sectoral composition of public and private demands in steady state; in the
third row, we assume an identical frequency of price changes for all sectors; and in
the fourth row, we assume both. These alternative parameterizations allow us to
study which of the sectoral features that we allow to vary across sectors are most
relevant.
Table 3 and all following tables report “variance multipliers”, which map the
variance of shocks into the variance of the respective variable. Thus, for instance,
if the variance multiplier of endogenous variable Xt is one, then its variance equal
that of productivity shocks, which are assumed the same for all sectors.
The main takeaway in Table 3 is that the optimal monetary and sectoral ﬁscal
policies approximately recover divine coincidence. We start, in the ﬁrst block of
Table 3, reporting the variance multiplier of aggregate inﬂation and the aggregate
output gap. Column (1) reports that, under the optimal policy mix, the variance
multiplier of aggregate inﬂation is 0.14% and of the output gap is 0.35%. In words,
as stressed in Section 3.1, the optimal mix of monetary and sectoral ﬁscal policies
does not attain the ﬁrst best.
In turn, if sectoral ﬁscal policy is passive ( ˜fkt = 0), ﬁrst row in column (2), the
optimal monetary policy closes the aggregate output gap. Notice this result holds
25

=== Page 27 ===
Table 3: Variance Multipliers and Welfare Loss of Sectoral Productivity Shocks
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Policy mix:
i∗
t , ˜f ∗
kt
i∗
t , ˜fkt = 0
πt = 0, ˜f ∗
kt
πt = 0, ˜fkt = 0
Variance of aggregate inﬂation and output gap, var(πt),var( ˜yt)
(a) αk,ωck,ωgk
0.14%, 0.35%
0.35%, 0%
0%, 1.7%
0%, 7.8%
(b) αk,ωgk = ωck
0.08%, 0.21%
0.33%, 0%
0%, 0.81%
0%, 4.4%
(c) αk = ¯α,ωck,ωgk
0%, 0%
0.16%, 0%
0%, 0.07%
0%, 0.95%
(d) αk = ¯α,ωgk = ωck
0%, 0%
0%, 0%
0%, 0%
0%, 0%
Average variance of sectoral inﬂation and output gaps, var(πkt),var( ˜ykt)
(a) αk,ωck,ωgk
14.6%, 53.9%
17.9%, 117%
14.5%, 55.8%
17.7%, 127%
(b) αk,ωgk = ωck
9.1%, 16.1%
17.9%, 116%
9.0%, 16.7%
17.5%, 120%
(c) αk = ¯α,ωck,ωgk
11.3%, 25.7%
13.2%, 78.6%
8.8%, 35.2%
13.1%, 77.6%
(d) αk = ¯α,ωgk = ωck
5.1%, 4.2%
12.5%, 74.5%
5.1%, 4.2%
12.5%, 74.5%
Per-period welfare loss
(a) αk,ωck,ωgk
2.8
4.7
3.1
6.3
(b) αk,ωgk = ωck
2.8
4.4
2.9
4.6
(c) αk = ¯α,ωck,ωgk
2.2
4.3
2.5
4.5
(d) αk = ¯α,ωgk = ωck
2.8
3.4
2.8
3.4
Note: This table reports variance multipliers of aggregate inﬂation and output gap
(ﬁrst block), the simple average of variance multipliers of sectoral inﬂation and
output gap (middle block) and per-period welfare (bottom block). Columns report
results for four alternative policy schemes: (1) optimal monetary and sectoral ﬁscal
policies mix, (2) optimal monetary policy and passive sectoral ﬁscal policy, (3) zero-
inﬂation targeting and optimal sectoral ﬁscal policy and (4) zero-inﬂation targeting
and passive sectoral ﬁscal policy. Rows in each block report results four alternative
calibrations: (a) baseline calibration with Calvo parameters matching the sectoral
average frequency of price changes in U.S. data and steady-state sectoral composi-
tion of private and public demand match U.S. data, (b) when only Calvo parameters
match sectoral frequency of price changes in U.S. data and equal sectoral composi-
tions of private and public demand are assumed, (c) when Calvo parameters match
the overall average of frequency of price changes in U.S. data and steady-state sec-
toral composition of private and public demand match U.S. data, and (d) when when
Calvo parameters match the overall average of frequency of price changes in U.S.
data and equal sectoral compositions of private and public demand are assumed.
26

=== Page 28 ===
even when the aggregate output gap does not explicitly enter in sectoral marginal
costs. To do so, monetary policy targets the modiﬁed aggregate inﬂation index
in equation (3.30) such that aggregate inﬂation has a variance multiplier of 0.35%.
The ﬁrst row in column (3) reports that an optimal sectoral ﬁscal policy coupled
with zero-inﬂation targeting yields a variance multiplier of the aggregate output
gap of 1.7% – higher than the 0.35% reported in the ﬁrst row of column (1). Finally,
comparing the ﬁrst row of columns (3) and (4) shows that optimal sectoral ﬁscal
policy contributes to decreasing the variance multiplier of the aggregate output
gap under zero-inﬂation monetary policy: if ﬁscal policy is passive, the variance
multiplier of the aggregate output gap is 7.8%.
The ﬁrst row of the second block of Table 3 reports the simple mean of the
variance multipliers of sectoral inﬂation and output gaps under our baseline cal-
ibration. Unsurprisingly, the joint optimal monetary and ﬁscal policy setup, in
column (1), is the one that delivers the lowest mean of the sectoral variance multi-
pliers, 14.6% and 53.9% for sectoral inﬂation and output gaps, respectively. What
is perhaps more surprising is that, under the optimal sectoral ﬁscal policy, zero-
inﬂation targeting in column (3) gets very close, respectively to 14.5% and 55.8%.
We conﬁrm this result when computing per-period welfare losses, shown in the
third block of the Table. Welfare losses are 2.8% for the optimal mix of monetary
and ﬁscal policy—column (1)–and 3.1% for zero-inﬂation monetary policy and op-
timal ﬁscal policy—column (3). Still focusing on the baseline calibration (ﬁrst row),
columns (2) and (4) of the second and third blocks, show that a passive sectoral
ﬁscal policy has a strong effect on the volatility of sectoral inﬂation and sectoral
output gaps regardless of whether monetary policy is acting optimally in column
(2) or targeting zero inﬂation in column (4).
Looking at alternative parameterizations reported in rows 2-4 in all blocks of
Table 3, results indicate that sectoral bias in the steady-state composition of private
and government demand has a stronger impact on the welfare loss than heteroge-
neous frequency of price changes across sector.
5.3
Cost-push shocks
As stressed by Rubbo (2023) in the context of production networks with no ﬁscal
policy, the aggregation of sectoral Phillips curves yields an additional term akin
27

=== Page 29 ===
to an aggregate cost-push shock even when with only productivity shocks at the
sectoral level. Although our economy does not have input-output linkages, qual-
itatively, the same result arises when any source of sectoral heterogeneity makes
aggregation not trivial – input-output linkages is one of them, but a similar result
arises from nominal price rigidities and the unequal composition of private and
government demand. We now explore the implications of optimal sectoral ﬁscal
policy over this “aggregate cost-push shock” when monetary policy is optimally
set versus when it follows zero-inﬂation targeting.
Aggregating the sectoral Phillips curves in equation (2.23) using equations (2.27),
(2.28) and (2.29), and deﬁning ¯λ = ∑K
k=1 ωckλk yields:
πt = βEtπt+1 + ¯λ
(1 −ϕ) ˜yt −χ∗˜ft
 + ut,
where ut ≡∑K
k′=1 ωck′λk′
(1 −ϕ) ˜yk′t −χ∗
k′ ˜fk′t
 −¯λ
(1 −ϕ) ˜yt −χ∗˜ft

. Table 4 re-
ports the variance multiplier of ut for all four monetary and sectoral ﬁscal policies
mixes we report in Table 3, as well as all four alternatives for the setup of sectoral
nominal price rigidity and the sectoral composition of private and public demand.
When all sectors are symmetric, the aggregate cost push shock is trivially zero,
as reported in the last row of Table 4 and can be veriﬁed in the deﬁnition of ut
above. When the only source of sectoral heterogeneity is the sectoral composition
of private and public demand, reported in the third row of Table 4, the aggregate
cost push shock is almost zero for all policy mixes we analyze. Thus, although it
theoretically can generate a so called “aggregate cost push shock" ut, the sectoral
composition of private and public demand, alone, has little quantitative force. In
turn, when sectors only differ in their degree of nominal rigidity, reported in the
second row of Table 4, the aggregate cost-push shock becomes somewhat stronger.
We report the main result in this subsection in the ﬁrst row of Table 4. When
both sources of sectoral heterogeneity are present, the variance multiplier of ut is
the largest. This reﬂects a reinforcing effect between the two sources of sectoral het-
erogeneity we consider, nominal price rigidity and the composition of public and
private demands. The ﬁrst row of Table 4 shows that optimal monetary policy has
a strong effect on reducing the variance multiplier of ut relative to a zero-inﬂation
policy – compare columns (1) and (2) with columns (3) and (4). In turn, the optimal
28

=== Page 30 ===
Table 4: Variance Multiplier of Aggregate Cost-Push Shock
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Policy mix:
i∗
t , ˜f ∗
kt
i∗
t , ˜fkt = 0
πt = 0, ˜f ∗
kt
πt = 0, ˜fkt = 0
(a) αk,ωck,ωgk
0.35%
0.14%
0.89%
7.1%
(b) αk,ωgk = ωck
0.08%
0.07%
0.12%
3.3%
(c) αk = ¯α,ωck,ωgk
0%
0.03%
0%
0.03%
(d) αk = ¯α,ωgk = ωck
0%
0%
0%
0%
Note: This table reports the variance multiplier of an aggregate cost-push shock ut.
Columns report results for four alternative policy schemes: (1) optimal monetary
and sectoral ﬁscal policies mix, (2) optimal monetary policy and passive sectoral
ﬁscal policy, (3) zero-inﬂation targeting and optimal sectoral ﬁscal policy and (4)
zero-inﬂation targeting and passive sectoral ﬁscal policy. Rows report results four
alternative calibrations: (a) baseline calibration with Calvo parameters matching
the sectoral average frequency of price changes in U.S. data and steady-state
sectoral composition of private and public demand match U.S. data, (b) when
only Calvo parameters match sectoral frequency of price changes in U.S. data and
equal sectoral compositions of private and public demand are assumed, (c) when
Calvo parameters match the overall average of frequency of price changes in U.S.
data and steady-state sectoral composition of private and public demand match
U.S. data, and (d) when when Calvo parameters match the overall average of
frequency of price changes in U.S. data and equal sectoral compositions of private
and public demand are assumed.
sectoral ﬁscal policy increases the variance multiplier of ut when monetary policy
is optimal – compare ﬁrst row, columns (1) and (2) – but reduces the variance mul-
tiplier of ut for a zero-inﬂation monetary policy – compare ﬁrst row, columns (3)
and (4).
5.4
Cyclicality of aggregate government spending
Finally, our analysis offers a new perspective on the cyclicality of aggregate gov-
ernment demand. In doing so, we also compare the implications of the optimal
monetary and sectoral ﬁscal policy mix to the implications of a zero-inﬂation mon-
29

=== Page 31 ===
etary policy and optimal sectoral ﬁscal policy.
A well-documented fact is that government spending is largely acyclical in ad-
vanced economies (see, for instance, Talvi and Vegh (2005)). In contrast, the basic
theory of the optimal provision of public goods, as pioneered by Samuelson (1954),
implies pro-cyclicality by equalizing the marginal willingness to pay for the public
good and its marginal rate of transformation. In our setup, with additive sepa-
rability in preferences between consumption, leisure and public goods as well as
lump-sum taxation, the optimal provision of sectoral public goods in the ﬁrst best
is a ﬁxed proportion of sectoral output, and thus, indeed, perfect pro-cyclicality
at the sectoral level arises. Yet, in our fully calibrated baseline model, the correla-
tion between aggregate output and government demand is lower, 0.62, when both
monetary and sectoral ﬁscal policies are optimal and 0.43 when monetary policy
targets zero inﬂation and sectoral ﬁscal policy is optimal. The following discussion
highlights the key features that generate such mild aggregate cyclicality despite the
perfect pro-cyclicality at the sectoral level in the ﬁrst best.
Two ingredients are key for this pattern: the unequal composition of aggregate
output and government demand, and the stabilizing role of disaggregated ﬁscal
policy. Under the optimal monetary and ﬁscal policy mix, government demand
must satisfy the condition in equation (3.34) which, for convenience, we reproduce
here after some algebra to facilitate the discussion:
K
∑
k=1
µkgkt =
K
∑
k=1
µk ¯gkt,
where gkt and ¯gkt denote actual and ﬁrst-best sectoral government demand, and
[µk]K
k=1 are steady-state sectoral shares of aggregate output. This result stems from
the optimal separation between monetary policy and ﬁscal policy as aggregate and
disaggregated stabilizers, respectively. Note that, in general, the log-linear approx-
imation of aggregate government demand weights sectors by its steady-state sec-
toral composition denoted by [ωgk]K
k=1. If the sectoral composition of private and
public demand are the same, then µk = ωgk for all k. As the Samuelson (1954) rule
implies in our setup that ¯gkt = ¯ykt, that is, perfect sectoral pro-cyclicality in the ﬁrst
best, and output aggregates sectors by [µk]K
k=1. Aggregate government demand in
30

=== Page 32 ===
this case is perfectly correlated with ﬁrst-best aggregate output.
However, if µk ̸= ωgk, this correlation between aggregate government demand
and ﬁrst-best output can be lower, amounting to 0.73 in our baseline calibration
– which accounts for the long-run sectoral composition of private and public de-
mand in the U.S.. Then, the correlation with actual output can be even lower de-
pending on the optimal sectoral ﬁscal policy rule in equation (3.32), also repro-
duced here after some algebra as follows:
gkt = ¯gkt −
ϕ
1 + (1 + ϕ)λk
˜ykt −
θ(1 −χ∗
k)
1 + (1 + ϕ)λk
πkt,
where ˜ykt denotes the sectoral output gap, πkt denotes sectoral inﬂation and λk ≡
(1 −αk)(1 −βαk)/αk is decreasing in Calvo parameters αk. In the U.S., aggregate
government demand is tilted to stickier sectors relative to private demand (Cox et
al., 2024). Hence, aggregate government demand puts higher weight than aggre-
gate output to sectors in which ﬁscal policy has on average larger deviations from
the ﬁrst best. In turn, those are also the sectors in which idiosyncratic productivity
shocks yield larger output gaps. As a result, the correlation of aggregate output
and government demand is 0.62 in our baseline calibration.
If instead monetary policy targets zero inﬂation, this correlation is 0.43 in the
baseline calibration, because in this case the optimal sectoral ﬁscal rule implies
even larger deviations of government demand at the sectoral level as well as larger
volatility of the aggregate output gap. This effect further lowers the correlation be-
tween output and government demand. A perhaps interesting observation is that,
in contrast to results under the optimal policy mix, here, the unequal composi-
tion of private and government demand and the sectoral heterogeneity in nominal
price rigidity do not reinforce each other in lowering aggregate pro-cyclicality. In
our numerical exercises, if we assume µk = ωgk and calibrate sectoral Calvo pa-
rameters to match the average sectoral frequency of price changes in the U.S., the
correlation of aggregate government demand with aggregate output only is 0.20.
These mechanisms do not fully explain the acyclicality observed in U.S. data:
The correlation between GDP and aggregate real purchases of the federal U.S. gov-
ernment, based on our procurement data, both at quarterly frequency, in logs, de-
31

=== Page 33 ===
trended and seasonally adjusted, is −0.05; likewise, the correlation of GDP with
Government Consumption Expenditures and Gross Investment, both obtained from
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) is 0.19 for the longest sample avail-
able, for 1947 to 2023. Still, the pro-cyclicality we obtain is quite mild consider-
ing the perfect pro-cyclicality at the sectoral level in the ﬁrst best. This perfect
pro-cyclicality also holds at the aggregate level when prices are sticky and mone-
tary policy is optimal if all sectors are identical, a corollary of divine coincidence.
Hence, disaggregated stabilization is key for aggregate ﬁscal policy to align theory
and data.
6
Conclusion
A common recommendation for monetary policy when shocks are disaggregated
and/or sectors are heterogeneous is to target an inﬂation index that gives higher
weight to sectors with larger deviations from efﬁcient output. We revisit this con-
clusion when sectoral government demand is used as a stabilization tool in a con-
ventional multi-sector New Keynesian model, deriving several new insights.
The optimal mix of monetary and ﬁscal policy takes a simple form: monetary
policy takes care of aggregate stabilization, whereas sectoral ﬁscal policy focuses
on sectors. Speciﬁcally, we derive an optimal ﬁscal rule which characterizes opti-
mal sectoral government spending. Optimal monetary policy deviates from a zero-
inﬂation target, and both monetary and sectoral ﬁscal policy give higher weight to
sectors in which a given shock yields larger deviations of output from efﬁcient lev-
els. However, numerical exercises show that the deviation of optimal monetary
policy from a zero-inﬂation target is quantitatively small relative to a case when
monetary policy is the only stabilization tool. In line with our optimal ﬁscal rule,
we ﬁnd that the relationship of sectoral government demand, sectoral inﬂation and
sectoral output implied by the model is broadly conﬁrmed in the U.S. data.
Finally, we show that aggregation of sectoral Phillips curves yields an extra
term akin to an aggregate cost-push shock that is much more volatile under mon-
etary policy targeting zero inﬂation than under its an optimal rule. We also show
that a mild cyclicality of aggregate government demand is not inconsistent with
the optimality of ﬁscal policy playing a stabilization role; it just does so at a disag-
32

=== Page 34 ===
gregated level. Future work may be able to ﬁne-tune the alignment of the model
predictions with the data, for example by incorporating the role of the zero-lower
bound for monetary policy or by incorporating alternative taxation schemes rela-
tive to the lump-sum taxes in our analysis.
33

=== Page 35 ===
References
Acosta, Miguel, “The Perceived Causes of Monetary Policy Surprises,” 2023.
Afrouzi, Hassan and Saroj Bhattarai, “Inﬂation and GDP Dynamics in Produc-
tion Networks: A Sufﬁcient Statistics Approach,” NBER Working Papers 31218,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc May 2023.
, Marina Halac, Kenneth S. Rogoff, and Pierre Yared, “Monetary Policy with-
out Commitment,” NBER Working Papers 31207, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc May 2023.
, Saroj Bhattarai, and Edson Wu, “Relative-Price Changes as Aggregate Supply
Shocks Revisited: Theory and Evidence,” Working Paper, NBER Inﬂation in the
COVID Era and Beyond Conference 2024.
Antonova, Anastassia and Gernot J. Müller, “Distorted Prices and Sectoral Taxes
in the New Keyensian Network model,” 2024. mimeo.
Aoki, Kosuke, “Optimal monetary policy responses to relative-price changes,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, August 2001, 48 (1), 55–80.
Bachmann,
Ruedigera,
Benjamin
Born,
Olga
Goldfayn-Frank,
Georgi
Kocharkov,
Ralph Luetticke,
and Michael Weber,
“A Temporary VAT
Cut as Unconventional Fiscal Policy,” NBER Working Paper 29442 2021.
Baqaee, David and Emmanuel Farhi, “Supply and Demand in Disaggregated
Keynesian Economies with an Application to the COVID-19 Crisis,” American
Economic Review, 2022, 112 (5), 1397–1436.
Benigno, Pierpaolo, “Optimal monetary policy in a currency area,” Journal of In-
ternational Economics, July 2004, 63 (2), 293–320.
Bianchi, Javier, Pablo Ottonello, and Ignacio Presno, “Fiscal Stimulus under
Sovereign Risk,” Journal of Political Economy, 2023, 131 (9), 2328–2369.
Bilbiie, Florin, Tommaso Monacelli, and Roberto Perotti, “Stabilization vs. Re-
distribution: The Optimal Monetary-Fiscal Mix,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
forthcoming 2024.
Bisin, Alberto, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Leeat Yariv, “Government Policy with
Time Inconsistent Voters,” American Economic Review, June 2015, 105 (6), 1711–
1737.
34

=== Page 36 ===
Bouakez, Hafedh, Omar Rachedi, and Emiliano Santoro, “The Government
Spending Multiplier in a Multisector Economy,” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 2023, 15 (1), 209–39.
,
, and Santoro Emiliano, “The Sectoral Origins of the Spending Multiplier,”
2022. mimeo.
Carvalho, Carlos, Fernanda Nechio, and Tiago Tristao, “Taylor rule estimation by
OLS,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2021, 124, 140–154.
Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan, “Business Cycle Account-
ing,” Econometrica, May 2007, 75 (3), 781–836.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andrea Weber, “Are Micro and
Macro Labor Supply Elasticities Consistent?,” American Economic Review, 2011,
101 (3), 471–475.
Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles, “Uncon-
ventional ﬁscal policy at the zero bound,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103
(4), 1172–1211.
Cox, Lydia, Gernot Müller, Ernesto Pasten, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael We-
ber, “Big G,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming, 2024.
D’Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, and Michael Weber, “Unconventional ﬁscal
policy,” in “AEA Papers and Proceedings,” Vol. 108 American Economic Asso-
ciation 2014 Broadway, Suite 305, Nashville, TN 37203 2018, pp. 519–523.
,
, and
, “Managing householdsâ€™expectations with unconventional poli-
cies,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2022, 35 (4), 1597–1642.
Eggertsson, Gauti B, Michael Woodford, Tor Einarsson, and Eric M Leeper, “Op-
timal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a Liquidity Trap [with Comments],” in
“NBER international seminar on macroeconomics,” Vol. 2004 The University of
Chicago Press Chicago, IL 2004, pp. 75–144.
Eusepi, Stefano, Bart Hobijn, and Andrea Tambalotti, “CONDI: A Cost-of-
Nominal-Distortions Index,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, July
2011, 3 (3), 53–91.
Farhi, Emmanuel, Gita Gopinath, and Oleg Itskhoki, “Fiscal Devaluations,” Re-
view of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (2), 725–760.
Flynn, Joel, Christina Patterson, and John Sturm, “Fiscal Policy in a Networked
Economy,” Working Paper 20339, National Bureau of Economic Research 2022.
35

=== Page 37 ===
Galí, Jordi and Roberto Perotti, “Fiscal Policy and Monetary Integration in Eu-
rope,” Economic Policy, 2003, 18 (37), 535–572.
and Tommaso Monacelli, “Optimal monetary and ﬁscal policy in a currency
union,” Journal of International Economics, September 2008, 76 (1), 116–132.
Gilchrist, Simon and Egon Zakrajšek, “Credit spreads and business cycle ﬂuctu-
ations,” American economic review, 2012, 102 (4), 1692–1720.
Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert G. King, “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and
the Role of Monetary Policy,” in “NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, Volume
12” NBER Chapters, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, October 1997,
pp. 231–296.
Guerrieri, Veronica, Guido Lorenzoni, Ludwig Straub, and IvÃ¡n Werning,
“Monetary Policy in Times of Structural Reallocation,” Proceedings of the 2021
Jackson Hole Symposium, 2021.
,
,
, and
, “Macroeconomic Implications of COVID-19: Can Negative Sup-
ply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages?,” American Economic Review, 2022, 112 (5),
1437–74.
Halac, Mariana and Pierre Yared, “Fiscal Rules and Discretion in a World Econ-
omy,” American Economic Review, 2018, 8 (108), 2305–2334.
and
, “Fiscal Rules and Discretion Under Limited Enforcement,” Econometrica,
September 2022, 90 (5), 2093–2127.
Hatchondo, Juan Carlos, Leonardo Martinez, and Francisco Roch, “Fiscal Rules
and the Sovereign Default Premium,” American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
nomics, October 2022, 14 (4), 244–73.
Hettig, Thomas and Gernot J. Müller, “Fiscal policy coordination in currency
unions at the effective lower bound,” Journal of International Economics, 2018, 115
(C), 80–98.
Känzig, Diego R, “The macroeconomic effects of oil supply news: Evidence from
OPEC announcements,” American Economic Review, 2021, 111 (4), 1092–1125.
Kliem, Martin and Alexander Kriwoluzky, “Toward a Taylor rule for ﬁscal pol-
icy,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2014, 17 (2), 294–302.
La’O, Jennifer and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, “Optimal Monetary Policy in Produc-
tion Networks,” Econometrica, 2022, 90 (3), 1295–1336.
36

=== Page 38 ===
Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson, “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evi-
dence from US Regions,” American Economic Review, March 2014, 104 (3), 753–
792.
Pastén, Ernesto, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael Weber, “The propagation of
monetary policy shocks in a heterogeneous production economy,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 2020, 116 (C), 1–22.
,
, and
, “Sectoral Heterogeneity in Nominal Price Rigidity and the Origin
of Aggregate Fluctuations,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2024, 16
(2), 318–52.
Proebsting, Christian, “Market segmentation and spending multipliers,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 2022, 128, 1–19.
Ramey, Valerie A. and Matthew D. Shapiro, “Costly capital reallocation and the
effects of government spending,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, June 1998, 48, 145–194.
Rubbo, Elisa, “Networks, Phillips curves, and monetary policy,” Econometrica,
2023, 91 (4), 1417–1455.
Samuelson, Paul A., “The Theory of Public Expenditure,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 1954, (36), 386–389.
Stock, James H and Motohiro Yogo, “Testing for weak instruments in linear IV
regression,” 2005.
Talvi, Ernesto and Carlos A. Vegh, “Tax base variability and procyclical ﬁscal pol-
icy in developing countries,” Journal of Development Economics, 2005, 78 (1), 156–
190.
Woodford, Michael, “Simple analytics of the government expenditure multiplier,”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2011, 3 (1), 1–35.
, “Effective Demand Failures and the Limits of Monetary Stabilization Policy,”
American Economic Review, 2022, 112 (5), 1475–1521.
37

=== Page 39 ===
Online Appendix:
Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policies in
Disaggregated Economies
Lydia Cox, Jiacheng
Feng, Gernot J. Müller, Ernesto Pastén, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael Weber
July 2024
A
Steady-State Solution
We focus on a symmetric steady state at the ﬁrm level with all ﬁrms setting the
same prices Pk(j) = P. Then, from equations in (2.6), Pk = Pc = P. Further, using
the convention that Ak = 1, the optimal pricing rule is such that
P =
θ
θ −1 MCn
k = Wk
once we impose the proper subsidy τk to offset markups in the steady state. This
result implies that sectoral wages should be all equal in the steady state, which is
conﬁrmed by the household’s ﬁrst order condition on leisure in (2.7) after impos-
ing νk = µ−ϕ
k
since Wk only relates to aggregate variables. These two latter results
together with (2.16) yield
C = 1 −χ
such that (2.5) solves Ck = ωck(1 −χ). As (2.16) implies Y = 1, the aggregation of
(2.13) implies G = χ. Further, the efﬁcient allocation in (2.15) implies Gk = ωgkχ).
Finally, constant consumption and prices imply from (2.3) that I = β−1.
B
Welfare function
Per-period household utility is given by
Ut ≡(1 −χ)logCt + χlogGt −∑
k
N1+ϕ
kt
1 + ϕ.
In the following we obtain second-order expansions for all its components.
First, putting together the ﬂow utility function of consumption with the Cobb-
Douglas aggregator of sectoral consumption yields
logCt = ∑ωck logCkt
38

=== Page 40 ===
Since χk may be interpreted as the optimal share of sectoral real public con-
sumption on sectoral production, the second-order Taylor expansion of the ﬂow
utility of consumption is9
logCkt = log(Ykt −Gkt) ≃log[(1 −χk)Yk] +
1
1 −χk
( ˆykt −χk ˆgkt) −1
2
χk
(1 −χk)2( ˆgkt −ˆykt)2.
Using deﬁnitions ˜ykt = ykt −¯ykt and ˜gkt = gkt −¯gkt, yields that ˆgkt −ˆykt = ( ˜gkt −
˜ykt) + ( ¯gkt −¯ykt) −(gk −yk) = ˜gkt −˜ykt yields
logCkt ≃
1
1 −χk
( ˆykt −χk ˆgkt) −1
2
χk
(1 −χk)2( ˜gkt −˜ykt)2 + t.i.p.
where the t.i.p. are constants and third order and above terms that are ignored in
the Taylor expansion. Aggregating across Ckt,
logCt ≃∑
k
ωck

1
1 −χ( ˆykt −χk ˆgkt) −1
2
χk
(1 −χk)2( ˜gkt −˜ykt)2

+ t.i.p.
(B.35)
Second, for public consumption, the second order Taylor expansion is
logGkt ≃logGk + ( ˆgkt + 1
2 ˆg2
kt) −1
2 ˆg2
kt = ˆgkt + t.i.p.
logGt ≃∑
k
ωgk ˆgkt + t.i.p.
(B.36)
Third, to obtain the second-order expansion of disutility of labor, we start from
disutility in each sector
νkN1+ϕ
kt
1 + ϕ ≃µk

ˆnkt + 1
2(1 + ϕ) ˆn2
kt

+ t.i.p.
where working hours in sector k is the aggregation across all ﬁrms in set Jk
Nkt =
Z
j∈Jk
Nkt(j)dj =
1
Akt
Z
j∈Jk
[Ckt(j) + Gkt(j)]dj = Ckt
Akt
Z
j∈Jk
Pkt(j)
Pkt
−θ
dj + Gkt
Akt
which log-linearization is
ˆnkt ≃ˆykt −akt + (1 −χk)zkt = ˜ykt + (1 −χk)zkt
9Here, we use ˆxkt = log Xkt
Xk ≃Xkt−Xk
Xk
−1
2

Xkt−Xk
Xk
2
≃Xkt−Xk
Xk
−1
2 ˆx2
kt
39

=== Page 41 ===
for Zkt = R
j∈Jk
 Pkt(j)
Pkt
−θ
dj such that zkt = logZkt ≃θ
2var{pkt(j)} is a second or-
der term around a steady state with zero inﬂation. Then, since z2
kt ≃0 and µk =
Nk/N = Yk/Y = (1 −χ)ωck + χωgk,
∑
k
νkN1+ϕ
kt
1 + ϕ ≃∑
k
[(1 −χ)ωck + χωgk]

˜ykt + (1 −χk)zkt + 1
2(1 + ϕ) ˜y2
kt

+ t.i.p.
(B.37)
Using (B.35), (B.36) and (B.37), the per-period utility can be written as
Ut = (1 −χ)logCt + χlogGt −∑
k
νkN1+ϕ
kt
1 + ϕ
≃(1 −χ)∑
k
ωck

1
1 −χk
( ˆykt −χk ˆgkt) −1
2
χk
(1 −χk)2( ˜gkt −˜ykt)2

+ χ∑
k
ωgk ˆgkt −∑
k
(1 −χ)ωck + χωgk

˜ykt + (1 −χk)zkt + 1
2(1 + ϕ) ˜y2
kt

+ t.i.p.
Since (1 −χ)ωck
χk
1−χk = χωgk, the terms ˆgkt cancels out in the utility. Furthermore,
since (1 −χ)ωck
1
1−χk = χωgk + (1 −χ)ωck, ˆykt cancels with ˜ykt, as their difference is
the exogenous productivity shock akt, so it goes in t.i.p. Simplifying the equation,
writing ˜gkt −˜ykt as the ﬁscal gap, using µk = (1 −χ)ωck + χωgk and plugging in
∑t βtzkt = ∑t βt θ
λk (πkt)2 from Woodford (2001),
Wt = E0
∞
∑
t=0
βtUt ≃−1
2E0
∞
∑
t=0
βt∑
k
µk
θ(1 −χk)
λk
π2
kt + (1 + ϕ) ˜y2
kt + χ∗
k ˜f 2
kt

+ t.i.p.
C
Solution for Time-Consistent Optimal Policy
The system of ﬁrst order conditions is characterized by
θ(1 −χk)
λk
πkt + φπ
kt + φp
kt = 0
(C.38)
(1 + ϕ) ˜ykt −(1 + ϕ)λkφπ
kt + φy
kt −νyt −ωgk
µk
νf t = 0
(C.39)
˜fkt + λkφπ
kt −φy
kt −(χ∗)−1 ωgk
µk
νf t = 0
(C.40)
40

=== Page 42 ===
φp
kt = φy
kt + ωck
µk
νπt
(C.41)
νpt =
K
∑
k=1
µkφy
kt
(C.42)
νyt + νf t =
K
∑
k=1
µkφy
kt
(C.43)
(χ∗)−1νf t = −
K
∑
k=1
µkφy
kt
(C.44)
Combining (C.42), (C.43) and (C.44) yields
νπt = (1 −χ)νyt = −χ∗−1νf t = −(1 −χ)νpt.
Using these expressions in (C.38), (C.39), (C.40) and plugging (C.41) in, we ob-
tain a simpliﬁed system of ﬁrst-order conditions:
θ(1 −χk)
λk
πkt + φπ
kt + φy
kt −(1 −χk)νyt = 0
(C.45)
(1 + ϕ) ˜ykt −(1 + ϕ)λkφπ
kt + φy
kt −(1 −χk)νyt = 0
(C.46)
˜fkt + λkφπ
kt −φy
kt + (1 −χk)νyt = 0
(C.47)
(1 −χk)νyt =
K
∑
k=1
µkφy
kt
(C.48)
Optimal ﬁscal policy.
Start by mixing (C.45) and (C.46) to obtain
φπ
kt =
1 + ϕ
1 + (1 + ϕ)λk
˜ykt −
θ/λk
1 + (1 + ϕ)λk
πkt
Now sum equation (C.46) and (C.47) up to obtain
ϕλkφπ
kt = (1 + ϕ) ˜ykt + ˜fkt
and combining these two expressions yield (3.32) which describes the equilibrum
relationship between sectoral ﬁscal gap, sectoral output gap and inﬂation under
the optimal policy labelled as “optimal sectoral ﬁscal policy".
Optimal monetary policy.
Take the solution for φπ
kt obtained above and plug it in
(C.46) and use (C.48) to obtain equation (3.33) which describes an aggregate rela-
41

=== Page 43 ===
tionship under optimal policy between sectoral output gaps and sectoral inﬂation
labelled as “optimal monetary policy".
Optimal aggregate ﬁscal policy.
Equation (3.34) can be obtained by replacing
sectoral inﬂation in (3.33) by using (3.32).
D
Feasibility of a Fiscal Divine Coincidence
The key in this analysis is to relax the assumption that the ﬁscal rule in the
frictionless economy is optimal. Deﬂated marginal costs are given by
mckt −pkt
=
ct + pt + ϕ(ykt −akt) −akt −pkt
mckt −pkt
=
ckt + ϕykt −(1 + ϕ)akt −pkt
mckt −pkt
=
1 + ϕ(1 −χk)
1 −χk
ykt −
χk
1 −χk
gkt −(1 + ϕ)akt
after using that ckt = (ykt −χkgkt)/(1 −χk). Deﬁne yn
kt as the log-deviations of out-
put in a frictionless economy from steady state for an arbitrary sectoral ﬁscal rule
gkt. Setting mckt = pkt yields
yn
kt = χkgkt + (1 + ϕ)(1 −χk)akt
1 + ϕ(1 −χk)
(D.49)
such that yn
kt = ¯ykt = akt if gkt = ¯gkt = akt. Plugging (D.49) in deﬂated marginal costs
yields
mckt −pkt = 1 + ϕ(1 −χk)
1 −χk
(ykt −yn
kt)
such that πkt = 0 if ykt = yn
kt. The last piece is the solution of ykt in (2.22) after
assuming that it = 0 and πkt = 0 for all k,t. After some algebra, equation (2.22)
becomes
ykt −χkgkt = Et(ykt+1 −χkgkt+1)
which solves ykt = yn
kt if χkgkt = yn
kt. Using (D.49), this is equivalent to: gkt = 1+ϕ
ϕχk akt.
This sectoral ﬁscal rule closes the output gap, that is, output is equal to its ﬂex price
level, and at the same time inﬂation is stabilized. Yet the ﬂex price level of sectoral
output is not efﬁcient because government demand deviates from the Samuelson
rule which calls for government spending to be adjusted one-for-one with produc-
tivity, see Section 2.2.The same results hold for an aggregate economy if K = 1. See
also the discussion in Woodford (2011).
42

