--- FILE: 2025_Antonova_Müller_NK-Network-Targeted-Taxes.pdf ---
Antonova, Anastasiia; Müller, Gernot
Working Paper
Distorted Prices and Targeted Taxes in the New Keynesian
Network Model
CESifo Working Paper, No. 12144
Provided in Cooperation with:
Ifo Institute – Leibniz Institute for Economic Research at the University of Munich
Suggested Citation: Antonova, Anastasiia; Müller, Gernot (2025) : Distorted Prices and Targeted Taxes
in the New Keynesian Network Model, CESifo Working Paper, No. 12144, Munich Society for the
Promotion of Economic Research - CESifo GmbH, Munich
This Version is available at:
https://hdl.handle.net/10419/331610
Standard-Nutzungsbedingungen:
Die Dokumente auf EconStor dürfen zu eigenen wissenschaftlichen
Zwecken und zum Privatgebrauch gespeichert und kopiert werden.
Sie dürfen die Dokumente nicht für öffentliche oder kommerzielle
Zwecke vervielfältigen, öffentlich ausstellen, öffentlich zugänglich
machen, vertreiben oder anderweitig nutzen.
Sofern die Verfasser die Dokumente unter Open-Content-Lizenzen
(insbesondere CC-Lizenzen) zur Verfügung gestellt haben sollten,
gelten abweichend von diesen Nutzungsbedingungen die in der dort
genannten Lizenz gewährten Nutzungsrechte.
Terms of use:
Documents in EconStor may be saved and copied for your personal
and scholarly purposes.
You are not to copy documents for public or commercial purposes, to
exhibit the documents publicly, to make them publicly available on the
internet, or to distribute or otherwise use the documents in public.
If the documents have been made available under an Open Content
Licence (especially Creative Commons Licences), you may exercise
further usage rights as specified in the indicated licence.
 
 
 
 
Distorted Prices and Targeted 
Taxes in the New Keynesian 
Network Model 
Anastasiia Antonova, Gernot Müller 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Working Papers 
12144
2025 
 September 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Imprint: 
CESifo Working Papers 
ISSN 2364-1428 (digital) 
Publisher and distributor: Munich Society for the Promotion  
of Economic Research - CESifo GmbH 
Poschingerstr. 5, 81679 Munich, Germany 
Telephone +49 (0)89 2180-2740 
  
Email office@cesifo.de 
https://www.cesifo.org  
Editor: Clemens Fuest 
An electronic version of the paper may be downloaded free of charge 
· from the CESifo website: www.ifo.de/en/cesifo/publications/cesifo-working-papers 
· from the SSRN website: www.ssrn.com/index.cfm/en/cesifo/   
· from the RePEc website: https://ideas.repec.org/s/ces/ceswps.html  
Distorted Prices and Targeted Taxes
in the New Keynesian Network Model∗
Anastasiia Antonova and Gernot J. Müller
September 2025
Abstract
When confronted with sectoral shocks, policymakers often resort to targeted, sector-
specific taxes in an ad hoc fashion. Based on the New Keynesian Network model, we
characterize the optimal tax response to sectoral shocks: it features twice as many tax
instruments as there are sectors, is budget-neutral, and not confined to the sector where
the shock originates. We show that the optimal policy can be approximated by a simple
rule that responds to inflation in the shocked sector and adjusts tax instruments in other
sectors according to input-output linkages. We study its quantitative performance in
a calibrated version of the model.
Keywords:
Sectoral shocks, sales taxes, production subsides, optimal
tax policy, simple rules, network, pricing frictions
JEL-Codes:
E32, E62
∗Antonova: Aix-Marseille Université (email: anastasiia.antonova@univ-amu.fr); Müller: University of
Tübingen, CEPR and CESifo (email: gernot.mueller@uni-tuebingen.de). We thank Eric Swanson, an anony-
mous referee, Luis Huxel, Raphael Schoenle, and seminar participants at KU Leuven, Maastricht University,
the Riksbank, the Bundesbank, the University of Lausanne, and the Macro Committee of the German
Economic Association for helpful comments and suggestions. The usual disclaimer applies.
1
Introduction
Macroeconomic shocks often originate in specific sectors of the economy or impact them
disproportionally (Foerster et al. 2011; Gabaix 2011; Cox et al. 2024a).
In response to
such shocks, governments frequently implement targeted subsidies or taxes. For example,
governments provided transfers and subsidies to address the energy crisis triggered by the
Russian invasion of Ukraine, offered support to the financial sector during the global financial
crisis, and extended financial aid to the service sector during the Covid-19 pandemic. Such
targeted fiscal measures appear appropriate, particularly because monetary policy cannot
be tailored to specific sectors, except through unconventional measures that have a distinct
fiscal flavor.
However, these tax policies are typically implemented on an ad hoc basis, and little is
known about how they should be optimally adjusted in response to sectoral shocks. For
instance, should the response be confined to the sector where the shock originates, or should
upstream and downstream sectors also be considered? What are the budgetary implications
of the optimal policy? Does the nature of the shock—supply versus demand—matter? Can
an efficient allocation be achieved, and if so, how many tax instruments are necessary to
achieve it? Lastly, concerns may arise about the feasibility of the optimal policy. Specifically,
what kind of information must policymakers have to execute the optimal policy?
We address these questions within a variant of the New Keynesian Network (NKN) model
of Rubbo (2023). We augment the model by allowing for sector-specific and potentially time-
varying sales taxes and production subsidies. As a result it becomes possible for the optimal
policy to restore the efficient allocation in the presence of sectoral shocks. Crucially, the
first-best policy requires the joint adjustment of both instruments across all sectors. This
is essential: since only a subset of firms adjusts prices, relative prices are distorted both
within and across sectors. Thus, in line with the principles of Tinbergen (1952), replicating
the flexible-price allocation necessitates using two instruments to address both sides of the
1
distortion.
This involves subsidizing firms’ production while simultaneously taxing their
sales. We propose a simple rule that responds solely to sectoral inflation and show that it
approximates the first-best policy arbitrarily well. This policy is budget-neutral and adjusts
taxes and subsidies across all sectors based on their proximity to the sector where the shock
originates and depending on the nature of the shock.
The NKN model offers a framework to systematically analyze sectoral stabilization poli-
cies. It features N sectors which are connected through input-output linkages. Production
in each sector uses labor and intermediate goods, potentially sourced from all sectors. In
each sector, there is a continuum of monopolistically competitive firms that operate identical
technologies but adjust prices only infrequently and, importantly, asynchronously. Factor
inputs within a sector are adjusted flexibly and instantaneously in order to meet demand
at posted prices. Households allocate spending across sectors in order to minimize expendi-
tures subject to sectoral demand shocks. There are also sector-specific shocks to total factor
productivity, or “supply shocks,” for short. We derive the canonical representation of the
model featuring a set of dynamic IS-curves and Phillips curves.
The relation between sectoral inflation and the sectoral output gap features a tradeoff
because adjusting a sector’s relative price to close its output gap creates price dispersion
within the sector, as not all firms adjust their prices simultaneously. Conversely, keeping
prices constant to avoid within-sector price dispersion results in output gaps due to the lack
of an adjustment of relative prices. A key property of the optimal policy follows directly: It
relies on two instruments in each sector (2N policy). Intuitively, by subsidizing production
in a sector, the policy incentivizes firms that can adjust prices to keep them stable. Through
sales taxes, which apply to consumers and intermediate goods trade alike, it steers demand
across sectors to close sectoral output gaps.
As a result, seller prices do not change in
equilibrium under the optimal tax policy.1 The network structure determines the response of
1Sales taxes effectively take over the job of ensuring allocative efficiency across sectors by altering buyer
prices. In this sense, our results turn the “socialist calculation debate” about the allocative role of prices
on its head (Von Mises 1953; Lerner 1934; Lange 1936). As prices fail to respond sufficiently, taxes can be
adjusted in their stead to signal scarcity to buyers.
2

==================================================
--- FILE: Missing_Tax_Instruments_LaO_Tahbaz-Salehi_2024_WP.pdf ---
Missing Tax Instruments:
Attaining Production Efficiency in Disaggregated,
Production Network Economies with Nominal Rigidities*
Jennifer La’O†
Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi‡
January 6, 2025
Abstract
We study optimal fiscal and monetary policy in multi-sector, input-output
economies with nominal rigidities and a rich set of tax instruments. Irrespective
of the network structure, with N>1 sectors, production efficiency can be achieved
with 2N state-contingent, sector-specific tax instruments. The optimal tax scheme
involves jointly stabilizing all prices set by sellers while generating efficient move-
ments in after-tax prices faced by buyers. Optimal fiscal and monetary policy are
independent of the vector of price rigidities; optimal sector-specific tax rates are
moreover independent of the availability of lump-sum taxes. We provide several tax
equivalences and non-equivalences.
Keywords: fiscal policy, monetary policy, production efficiency, production net-
works, misallocation.
JEL codes: E32, E52, E62, E63, D61
*This paper is the direct product of a lively and insightful post-seminar discussion at the Federal Re-
serve Bank of Minneapolis in January 2021 following a presentation of our paper, “Optimal Monetary
Policy in Production Networks.” We thank Manuel Amador, V.V. Chari, Patrick Kehoe, Juanpa Nicolini,
and Pedro Teles for pushing us in this direction and for their constructive comments and questions. We
also thank Hassan Afrouzi for helpful conversations and insights on this paper.
†Columbia University, NBER, and CEPR. jenlao@columbia.edu.
‡Northwestern University and CEPR. alirezat@kellogg.northwestern.edu.
1
Introduction
In multi-sector, input-output economies with nominal rigidities, the first best allocation
is generically unattainable with monetary policy alone (Aoki, 2001; Woodford, 2003b,
2010; La’O and Tahbaz-Salehi, 2022). Even when shocks are exclusively technological,
as long as tax instruments are non-state-contingent, monetary policy can attain at most
a “third-best” allocation: one that features production inefficiency and an endogenous,
state-contingent labor wedge (La’O and Tahbaz-Salehi, 2022; Rubbo, 2023). Optimal
monetary policy in multi-sector economies thereby contrasts sharply to its one-sector
counterpart: in the standard New Keynesian (NK) model with technology shocks, the
first best is achievable with price level stabilization and a constant sales subsidy.
From this observation one might conclude that there are “missing” tax instru-
ments in the multi-sector, input-output NK framework. Indeed, it is clear that a state-
contingent labor income or consumption tax could eliminate the state-contingent labor
wedge. It is less clear, however, what tax instruments would restore production effi-
ciency. The heart of the problem is the following. In this class of models, monetary pol-
icy can target at most one price index. But with sector-specific technology shocks and
nominal rigidities, no price index can eliminate misallocation both within and across
sectors. To this end, finer-tuned fiscal instruments appear necessary.
But what instruments? And in what manner should they to be used? We address
these questions in this paper. Within a broad class of multi-sector NK models with
input-output linkages, and allowing for a rich set of fiscal instruments, we jointly char-
acterize optimal monetary and fiscal policy. Our main result is to demonstrate how dis-
tortionary taxation can be used to restore production efficiency and thereby circumvent
the problem faced by monetary policy. The tax scheme we engineer involves jointly sta-
bilizing all prices set by sellers while generating efficient movements in after-tax prices
faced by buyers.
In any environment with nominal rigidities, fiscal and monetary policy interact:
the efficacy and optimality of monetary policy depend on the details of fiscal policy.
The contribution of this paper is to thereby establish the theoretical benchmark of
sufficiently rich fiscal instruments within the class of multi-sector, input-output NK
economies. Our benchmark differs markedly from—and, in fact, constitutes the polar
opposite of—the standard benchmark of “inactive” fiscal policy in which subsidies are
used only to eliminate steady-state markups. As argued above, the distance between the
two benchmarks is small to non-existent in the one-sector NK framework but widens
with multiple sectors and intermediate good trade. Recent papers consider environ-
ments in the interior of this gap.
Prior to studying monetary policy in environments featuring restricted sets of “ac-
1
tive” fiscal instruments, it would be useful to first understand the sufficiently rich fiscal
instruments benchmark. What are the missing fiscal tools that restricted sets may or
may not compensate for? Answering this question, characterizing these instruments,
and establishing this benchmark is what we do in this paper.
The Model and Results. Firms are linked to one another via an input-output network.
They produce goods using labor, capital, and intermediate inputs and are subject to
industry-level productivity shocks, demand shocks, and shocks to elasticities of substi-
tution (or markups). Following the NK framework, firms set prices and face Calvo price
rigidities; we allow the Calvo parameter to vary by sector. A representative household
consumes the final good, supplies labor, saves, and invests in capital. A government
finances exogenous public expenditure and sets fiscal and monetary policy jointly.
We take the standard Ramsey approach and assume the government has access to
a rich set of distortionary, linear tax instruments—including multiple types of sector-
specific, state-contingent tax rates—but cannot raise money with lump-sum taxation.
The latter restriction on fiscal instruments implies that full efficiency, i.e. the “first best,”
cannot be achieved; we later relax this restriction in an extension.
Our main analysis centers on implementation of the Ramsey optimum, which in our
economy coincides with the canonical Lucas and Stokey (1983) benchmark. We focus
on the Ramsey optimum for the following reason: this benchmark exhibits production
efficiency in the sense of Diamond and Mirrlees (1971); see Chari and Kehoe (1999).
Implementation of the Ramsey optimum therefore demonstrates how a sufficiently rich
set of fiscal instruments can restore production efficiency in this class of economies.
Our main theorem characterizes monetary and fiscal policy that jointly implement
the Ramsey optimum. Without loss of generality, we focus on implementations in which
monetary policy stabilizes the final good price level. Our characterization of optimal
fiscal policy yields the following six lessons:
1. The optimal tax structure achieves production efficiency. In order to do so, sector-
specific tax rates play two roles: they stabilize seller prices and generate efficient
fluctuations in after-tax prices.
2. Optimal sector-specific tax rates are state-contingent. They depend on the real-
ized nominal wage, sectoral technologies, and sectoral elasticities of substitution,
but they do not depend on sectoral demand shocks and government spending.
Optimal monetary and fiscal policy are invariant to the vector of price rigidities.
3. Regardless of the network structure, with N sectors production efficiency can be
attained with 2N sector-specific tax instruments: N sales taxes levied on sellers
and N sales taxes levied on buyers. Unlike in standard models with price flexibil-
2
ity, taxes levied on sellers and on buyers when sellers face price rigidities are not
equivalent.
4. Sector-specific input taxes on labor, capital, and intermediate goods can substi-
tute for the seller-imposed sales taxes. In this implementation, intermediate good
input taxes are destination-specific but not origin-specific.
5. Sector-specific intermediate good and final good taxes can substitute for the
buyer-imposed sales taxes. In this implementation, intermediate good input taxes
are origin-specific but not destination-specific.
6. Optimal sector-specific tax rates are independent of the availability of lump-sum
taxes.
What roles do the sector-specific tax instruments play in restoring production effi-
ciency? Lesson 1 answers this question. Production efficiency requires no misalloca-
tion within and across sectors—a goal unattainable with monetary policy alone. The
tax scheme we engineer involves jointly stabilizing seller prices while simultaneously
generating efficient movements in after-tax prices faced by buyers. This tax scheme
eliminates misallocation within and across sectors, ensuring efficient production of the
final good.
These dual roles require tax state-contingency. Lesson 2 tells us what dimensions of
the state space the optimal sector-specific taxes are contingent upon. It also answers
the more practical question of what information is needed by the fiscal authority in
order to administer such taxes. We find that the optimal tax rates are contingent on
realized marginal costs and elasticities of substitution or, more generally, desired mark-
ups. While this is arguably a heavy information burden for the fiscal authority, what is
perhaps more surprising are the dimensions of the state space the optimal tax rates are
not contingent upon. Conditional on realized marginal costs, sector-specific tax rates
are independent of sector-specific demand and government spending.
We find that for any implementation of the Ramsey optimum, tax rates are inde-
pendent of the vector of sectoral price rigidities (Calvo parameters). The irrelevance
of sectoral price rigidities for optimal fiscal and monetary policy, even when the opti-
mal allocation does not coincide with the first best, generalizes previously-established
results by Correia, Nicolini and Teles (2008) to multi-sector NK economies with input-
output linkages.
Lessons 1 and 2 are general in that they apply to all implementations of the Ramsey
optimum. Moving on, we explore specific tax implementations. The first is the “least
instruments” implementation: we show that, irrespective of the input-output structure,
3
with N>1 sectors and two roles for taxes, 2N sector-specific taxes can implement the
Ramsey optimum (Lesson 3). This implementation requires N sales taxes levied on
sellers and N sales taxes levied on buyers. We thus exploit a non-equivalence between
sales taxes collected on sellers and on buyers when sellers face nominal rigidities, as
highlighted by Poterba, Rotemberg and Summers (1986).
Despite this particular tax non-equivalence, we present two more implementations
that showcase two different tax equivalences. In the first, we assume that the seller-
imposed sales tax is unavailable.
The Ramsey optimum can still be implemented:
sector-specific taxes on labor, capital, and intermediate good inputs can substitute for
the missing seller-imposed sales tax (Lesson 4). In the second, we assume that the
buyer-imposed sales tax instrument is unavailable. The Ramsey optimum can again
be implemented: sector-specific intermediate good and final good taxes can substitute
for the missing buyer-imposed sales tax (Lesson 5).
Whether or not the first-best is attainable depends on the availability of lump-sum
tax instruments. A question arises as to whether the availability of lump-sum taxa-
tion alters the optimal sector-specific tax instruments. We show that the answer is no:
whether or not the Ramsey optimum coincides with the first-best changes only the op-
timal aggregate tax rates—it has no effect on the optimal sector-specific tax rates (Les-
son 6). The irrelevance of lump-sum taxation for the optimal sector-specific tax rates
drives home the point that their main function is to restore within-period production
efficiency.
Related literature. This paper demonstrates how a rich set of distortionary tax instru-
ments can be used to implement the Ramsey optimum and completely circumvent the
problem faced by monetary policy. In this sense, our paper is closest in spirit to Correia,
Nicolini and Teles (2008) and Correia, Farhi, Nicolini and Teles (2013). Our contribution
vis-`a-vis their work is to extend this insight to multi-sector, input-output NK economies
and, specifically, to characterize within this class of models the sector-level tax rates that
attain production efficiency.
Our results apply to a broad class of multi-sector NK models with or without input-
output linkages. Our framework is fairly general in that it can flexibly nest the economic
environments found in Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000); Aoki (2001); Mankiw and
Reis (2003); Benigno (2004); Huang and Liu (2005); Woodford (2010); Eusepi, Hobijn and
Tambalotti (2011); Ozdagli and Weber (2017); Past´en, Schoenle and Weber (2020, 2024);
Ghassibe (2021); La’O and Tahbaz-Salehi (2022); Rubbo (2023); Bouakez, Rachedi and
Santoro (2023); Afrouzi and Bhattarai (2023); Xu and Yu (2024), among others.1 Relative
1Related, too, is the work of Faria-e-Castro (2021), Guerrieri et al. (2022), Baqaee and Farhi (2022), and
Rubbo (2024). These papers focus on disaggregated, multi-sector NK models with and without input-
output linkages but feature some form of household heterogeneity. For this reason, our model does not
4
to most multi-sector NK models, we add physical capital as a factor of production.
As we have noted, the contribution of our paper vis-`a-vis the multi-sector, input-
output NK literature is to establish a benchmark in which the set of tax instruments
is sufficiently rich to achieve production efficiency. A standard benchmark in this lit-
erature is to assume non-state-contingent sales subsidies that eliminate steady-state
markups (as in Woodford, 2003b; Gal´ı, 2008). Recent papers, however, move past this
benchmark and consider the implications of sector-specific and state-contingent gov-
ernment purchases: see Proebsting (2022); Cox et al. (2024); Flynn et al. (2024); Bouakez
et al. (2024) as well as Ramey and Shapiro (1998). In a taxonomy of models, one can
think of these environments as featuring a set of fiscal instruments that is strictly larger
than in the standard benchmark, yet restricted relative to our sufficiently rich fiscal
instrument benchmark.
We complement this growing body of work but focus instead on linear tax instru-
ments. Furthermore, an understanding of both benchmarks—or, both extremes—is
useful for interpreting the interior.
Layout. This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the economic
environment; in Section 3 we characterize equilibria. In Section 4 we state and solve the
Ramsey problem, and in Section 5 we study its implementation. In Section 6 we explore
several specific implementations that illustrate the main results of the paper. In Section
7 we conclude. All proofs are found in the Appendix.
2
The Environment
Time is discrete, indexed by t = 0, 1, . . . , ∞. We denote the aggregate state at time t by
st ∈S where S is a finite set. We let st = {s0, ..., st} ∈St denote a history of states up
to and including st. We let µ(st|st−1) denote the probability of history st conditional on
st−1, and with slight abuse of notation we let µ(st) denote the unconditional probability
of history st.
There is a representative household with time-separable utility:
∞
X
t=0
X
st
βtµ(st)U(C(st), L(st)),
(1)
explicitly capture these environments. In another related vein, Ghassibe and Ferrari (2024) develop and
analyze a multi-sector, production network model with endogenous price rigidities due to menu costs.
Our model instead features exogenous nominal rigidities: in our baseline we assume Calvo pricing, but
our model can also accommodate informational frictions. Finally, Qiu, Wang, Xu and Zanetti (2024) study
monetary policy in a small open economy with domestic and cross-border input-output linkages. Our
model is closely related but features no international trade.
5

==================================================
